

====================================================================================================

How Does Susan Collins Keep Winning?

====================================================================================================

The 2020 election made Maine Sen. Susan Collins a political legend.

National Democrats, who’d effectively let Collins walk to victory in 2014, wanted her seat in the
worst way this time. The Democratic candidate, state House Speaker Sara Gideon, and her outside
affiliates raised more money than could even be spent on a political campaign in Maine. Democrats’
heavy-handed assault seemed to be working: Collins did not lead in a single public poll for the
entirety of 2020. While not celebrating prematurely, Democrats had reason to be cautiously
optimistic that they might finally catch their white whale.

“Sara was leading every private poll that she had,” too, former Rep. Tom Allen, who lost to
Collins in 2008 and is a friend of Gideon’s, told me.

Collins’ team didn’t know what was coming, either. “I don’t think anybody had a firm bead on
what the result was going to be,” Lance Dutson, a Maine Republican strategist who worked on
Collins’ 2008, 2014, and 2020 campaigns, told me. “There was definitely some concern.”

Among those watching the returns on election night with Collins was Bill Green, a household name in
Maine local broadcasting who had dropped his long-standing apolitical image to endorse Collins in a
campaign ad. Both sides of the race agreed that Green’s ad had a significant impact on the
contest, but Green himself wasn’t sure it would be enough.

“I started the night thinking she was going to lose,” Green told me. “Very early in that
evening, the returns from a town called Etna came in. It was like 520 to 170, and I thought,
‘that’s not 60–40, that’s 3-to-1.’ ” More towns in Collins’ base, the small-town,
northern parts of Maine, came in with similarly lopsided margins. An hour after thinking she would
lose, Green felt comfortable. I asked him if Collins showed any roller coaster of emotions as she
watched the returns next to him.

“No,” he said. “She’s calm. She’s the same.”

Collins beat Gideon by 9 points among the same Maine electorate that selected Joe Biden over
then-President Donald Trump by 9 points. It was a night of many surprises nationally in a year of
trash polling. But no outcome left as many jaws on the floor as the Maine Senate race. That included
Gideon’s.

“She was stunned. She was _stunned_,” Allen told me. Gideon didn’t respond to inquiries for
this article and, since the release of her prerecorded concession speech, has all but disappeared
from political life.

Collins’ dramatic upset gave her an aura of invincibility. She was already known to be a difficult
opponent. In 2008, for example—admittedly in an era when ticket-splitting was more
common—Collins defeated Allen by 23 points even as Barack Obama carried Maine by 17. But when she
sent the full brunt and largesse of the national Democratic Party packing, she showed a new sort of
grit. Her fellow Senate Republicans bowed before her. Arkansas Sen. Tom Cotton declared her “the
greatest that’s ever been.” Texas Sen. John Cornyn shared a meme of Collins sitting on a throne
of skulls.

Six years later, Collins again is in a competitive election—albeit against a very different kind
of opponent—in a bad political environment for Republicans. National Democrats, again, have their
sights trained on flipping her seat. Collins has led in only a few polls this year. Here we go
again.

How, then, does Susan Collins do it? How, in a state that hasn’t voted for a Republican for
president since 1988, has she been able to survive the ever-closing-in walls of nationalized
politics and polarization, where the quality of individual senators matters less to voters than
which party controls the Senate? And, despite it being perhaps the worst political environment for
Republicans that she’s ever run in, can she do it again?

If you’ve tried to watch a YouTube video in Maine over the past few months, you have probably been
asked to thank Susan Collins.

The millions of dollars in ads run by a dark money group tied to Senate Republican leaders follow a
similar structure. You like water? Collins secured millions to protect Maine’s water. Hospitals?
Millions to expand them. You hate diabetes? She has a long and thorough career securing money for
diabetes research. The ads, for a while, encouraged viewers to “call and thank Senator Collins”
and “tell her you appreciate all she is doing for Maine.” Perhaps recognizing that it was a bit
tin-eared to encourage voters to call and _thank_ their public servants for doing their jobs, the
more recent ads now encourage viewers to “call and tell” Collins to keep fighting for these
interests.

Collins’ reelection strategy is simple: maintain her well-regarded constituent services operation.
In each and every campaign she’s run, “it’s always been about what she can do for Maine,” as
Tom Allen put it. It is about using her leverage in Congress, both as a swing vote and, now, as the
top appropriator in the Senate, to bring money back home, not only in the months before reelection,
but every minute of every term. Instead of doing big rallies, she’s doing ribbon-cuttings and
groundbreakings on projects for which she has claimed credit. She’s visiting medical research
centers she’s helped fund. Her website puts on vivid display, in map and list form, the specific
earmarks she has landed.

“She quantifies her work to the voters as her primary reelection strategy,” Dutson said.

It works because it’s not just that she’s cutting checks and helicopter-dumping cash across the
Maine countryside. She’s forming long-term relationships with nonpartisan interests and
groups—firefighters, diabetics, healthcare researchers, Alzheimer’s research advocacy
groups—that lock into her coalition. “That’s something that I don’t think you can put
together in an 18-month campaign, or even in one term in the Senate,” former Missouri Sen. Roy
Blunt, who served with Collins on the Appropriations Committee, told me. “It almost transfers from
generation to generation in a career like Susan has had.”

Democrats will concede the point here.

“She spent 30 years building relationships that matter with voters,” David Farmer, a Maine
Democratic strategist and columnist, told me. He mentioned one of the YouTube ads about how Collins
had led efforts to increase funding for diabetes research. “You know, it’s not like the
Democratic side is _pro_-diabetes,” Farmer said. “But she has shown up for those groups and
worked hard in that regard on these constituent service issues that have mattered. And that’s
real. You can’t take that away from what she’s done.”

And it’s just in the past year that the real money started rolling in.

In 2020, Collins emphasized during her campaign that she was in line to be the next chair of the
Appropriations Committee, a title she assumed at the beginning of 2025. While congressional
appropriators’ authority has been harmed by the Trump administration’s disregard for
congressional spending mandates, there’s still plenty of earmark money for members to spread
around. And for the chair, it’s orders of magnitude more money.

“What you really get as appropriations chair is _hundreds_ of millions of dollars in earmarks,”
a fellow congressional appropriator told me, “not what everybody else gets.” In Collins’ case,
for the current fiscal year, the sum total—as she proudly boasted in a press release—was
“$428,643,000” for 158 projects “across each of Maine’s 16 counties.” Maine’s smallness,
too, ensures that she can fulfill her home state’s dreams while also being magnanimous with her
colleagues. Another appropriator, South Dakota Sen. Mike Rounds, noted that she’s still been
“pretty judicious” in spreading the pot around the committee, noting that “there have been
appropriations chairmen in the past that have perhaps been more overt in the interest for their own
state.”

“It’s a fine line,” he said.

Collins is not just touting the money she’s already brought in for Maine. She is unsubtly telling
Maine voters that this gravy train has only just left the station. As she regularly notes, she is
the “first Maine senator to chair the Senate Appropriations Committee in 92 years,” describing
the moment of her chairmanship as “truly a once-in-a-century opportunity for our state.”

The project Collins chose to champion in her first television advertisement in May was the Eastport
breakwater, a pier in Eastport, Maine, that collapsed in 2014. In the ad, Eastport’s Port
Authority director celebrates Collins for her role in helping to secure federal grant money that
allowed the breakwater to be rebuilt.

A couple of weeks after the ad came out, I spoke with Brian Schuth, the city manager of Eastport—a
nonpartisan, unelected position. While he’s only been in the job a couple of years, he spoke to
how these grants to small-town or rural areas, particularly in Collins’ political base to the
north, are the only way that such projects can be undertaken. He noted that the federal contribution
to rebuild the breakwater, which creates the inner harbor that allows fishermen and lobstermen to
work, was $6 million.

“My total taxation in Eastport is $4 million,” he said. He also described work Collins’ office
had done to help the city’s small airport build a new terminal and runway. (“As a matter of
fact,” he noted, “that’s how Susan and the other congressional people can get here for the
Fourth of July parade.”)

“The total amount that she may bring to our corner of Maine,” Schuth said, “may not be huge,
but we’re not huge.”

Eastport is small and remote, like much of northern Maine. Eastport is in Washington County, which
is bigger in area than Delaware but has a total population of only 31,200. Collins is originally
from Caribou (population 7,300) in Aroostook County, the largest county in the state by area, with
nearly all of its 67,000-person population hugging Route 1 along the state’s eastern border. These
are all towns and areas that, with their small tax bases, have limited means for public
investment—whether that’s for a major pier, an executive airport, or a fire station. It makes
the state, overall, dependent on federal dollars, a net “taker” state.

Collins’ message is that with her, and her seniority, they have an opportunity to take like never
before.

[Susan wears a red suit and waves at a crowd.]
[Susan wears a red suit and waves at a crowd.] Susan Collins in 1996.  Portland Press Herald via
Getty Images
But it’s not just that Susan Collins is good at bringing money to Maine. She’s also great at
taking—and getting—credit for bringing money to Maine.

Brian Schuth told me that when he’s putting in an earmark request, he has been advised to take it
to Collins’ office first among the Maine delegation “because she’s got the most seniority and
she’s the chair of the Appropriations Committee.” Straightforward enough.

Another source in Maine politics, though, told me of a better strategy. This source was advising a
Maine foundation on how to request an earmark. When the group said they planned to go to Collins
first, the source recommended they start with Democratic Rep. Chellie Pingree, also an appropriator,
in the House. “I told the board chair” that whatever Pingree could get in the House, “Susan
will up that by a million dollars. _Whatever_ the congresswoman could get, Susan would put another
million dollars when it came through the Senate. And that’s exactly what she did.”

“She’s very attuned to figuring out how she can be seen as the champion for particular projects
in Maine,” the source said, noting that it’s “not a bad thing.” It does highlight how
central _I can do more for Maine_ is to her campaigns, though.

Senators get higher earmark allocations, so for bigger requests, Pingree and Collins—who, decades
after Collins defeated Pingree in her first reelection race in 2002, have a good working
relationship—might tag-team with each other to secure the funding. But, as another longtime
observer of Collins in Maine politics put it to me, Collins “has a remarkable way of using ‘I’
more than ‘we’ in statements.”

In other words, Collins is more than just the chairwoman of the Senate Appropriations Committee:
She’s a politician. And she guards her reputation closely.

“In my view, she’s the most intensely competitive person in the Senate,” former Sen. Roy Blunt
told me. “She’s competitive about the work, and she’s also competitive about the politics. In
both places, that allows her to get things done.”

There are other ways to put it.

“She holds a grudge like nobody’s business,” David Farmer, the Maine Democratic strategist and
columnist, told me. “So if you cross her,” he said, “there’s a price to be paid.”

“If somebody endorses against her, somebody works against her, or someone says something that’s
unkind, someone writes an editorial that disagrees with her, a reporter writes a story that is
negatively inclined against her,” he said, “they hear about it.” He mentioned that she had
tried to get him fired on two distinct occasions.

That means that Collins’ position atop the Appropriations Committee, and the hundreds of millions
of dollars in earmarks that come with it, is both a carrot and a stick.

“There’s a price to be paid for people who may be thinking about different issues,” Farmer
said, “but maybe you’ve got an appropriations request in and you don’t want to risk burning
that bridge.”

“I’ve covered a lot of politicians over 40 years now,” journalist Steve Collins, who’s been
covering Maine for a decade, told me, “and her office is the most persnickety that I have ever run
across.” He describes it as them “calling and having lots of little questions and points about
pretty much everything that gets written about her.” He said he found it a little “odd” and
“extreme,” but didn’t think she held _grudges_, necessarily.

“I’ve said some pretty horrible things about her,” he said about writing columns critical of
her, “and she’s always nice enough when I talk to her.” It’s similar, he said, to how Susan
Collins’ staffers talk about working for her. “She’s very exacting.”

It was a more diplomatic interpretation of the way Farmer put it: “She is a hard-ass. And she’s
a hard-ass on her staff. And they’re hard-asses.”

“But,” Farmer said, “they’re very good.”

[A collage of Graham Platner, Bellows, Gideon, and other opponents of Collins' over the years.]
[A collage of Graham Platner, Bellows, Gideon, and other opponents of Collins' over the years.]
Photo illustration by Slate. Photos by Portland Press Herald via Getty Images, John
Patriquin/Portland Press Herald via Getty Images, Derek Davis/Portland Press Herald via Getty
Images, and Sophie Park/Getty Images.
Time is a flat circle in Susan Collins’ campaigns. Whenever she has been up for reelection, her
opponents have tried to persuade Mainers that she’s not a “moderate.”

“You don’t get to call yourself a moderate if you voted against the minimum wage,” Chellie
Pingree told Boston Globe columnist Ellen Goodman in 2002. “You don’t get to call yourself a
moderate if you voted for the biggest tax cut for the rich.”

In 2008, then-Sen. Sherrod Brown did a campaign stop on Tom Allen’s behalf. The Bangor Daily News
quoted Brown talking about how Susan Collins voted with George W. Bush 81 percent of the time:
“Then, when she comes back to Bangor, she brags about the other 19 percent of the time.”

Her 2014 opponent, Shenna Bellows, made the same argument in 2014. She lost by 37 points. Gideon
tried a variation, arguing that Collins had changed from the person she was when first elected. It
didn’t work—at least, well enough. Flash-forward to 2026, pick any day of the week, and now
it’s Graham Platner’s turn. “We are going to beat someone who, for years, has tried to trick
us all into thinking that she’s a moderate,” Graham Platner said on the trail in early June.

Is Susan Collins a moderate? Her success certainly depends on convincing voters that she is. But if
you would like to set a social media thread ablaze with ferocious debate, this question will never
let you down.

That’s because,as strongly as people _feel_ like there is an objective answer, it’s a subjective
question. Yes, she is one of the, if not the, most bipartisan senators in the body year in and year
out. Yes, she also votes with her party the vast majority of the time—just less than most of the
others do, and sometimes on high-profile occasions. She has voted for some signature pieces of
Republican legislation, controversial nominations, and impeachments of Republican presidents—and
voted against other signature pieces of Republican legislation, controversial nominations, and
impeachments of that same Republican president. The closest thing to an objective answer we have is
the verdict from Maine swing voters, who so far have decided every six years that, whatever she is,
she’s worth sending back to the Senate.

But there’s more to moderation than votes, and there’s more to politics than policy positions
right now. At a time when President Trump is pushing executive power past its legal limits—and, by
the way, attempting to neuter the Senate along the way—something’s a little off when you only
want to talk about money for new fire stations.

This isn’t new ground. In a 2008 Associated Press story, Allen’s campaign argued that Collins
“has been dodging the big issues like Iraq, health care, and the economy while trumpeting her work
on constituent services.” Allen still expresses these frustrations today.

“ ‘Bold’ is not an adjective that’s ever been applied to her,” Allen told me. “She’s a
decent person. But I would say she’s very, very cautious. Timid, even. What she typically says
about difficult issues is that she’s ‘concerned,’ she’s always ‘concerned.’ And then
maybe she does something, maybe she doesn’t. She’s not Lisa Murkowski.”

It’s no surprise that this comparison would be top of mind for a Maine Democrat like Allen.

In 2018, Murkowski was the only Republican to vote against proceeding to Brett Kavanaugh’s Supreme
Court nomination. I was in the chamber for that vote, and I will never forget it. You could only
hear her offer a hushed “no” because the room had never been more silent.

A couple of months earlier, I had been in a press scrum with Collins when she reported that
Kavanaugh had just told her, in a private meeting, that he believed _Roe_ was “settled law.”
Four years later, when Kavanaugh voted to unsettle _Roe_, Collins wrote in a statement that the
_Dobbs_ decision was “inconsistent” with what Kavanaugh had told her. One of the anchors of
Collins’ moderate image is that she supports the right to an abortion. The 2026 election will be
the first time she’s been on the ballot since the Supreme Court, with Kavanaugh as a swing vote,
eliminated that right.

Moderation alone, though, won’t do it. Collins will also need every right-leaning vote she can get
in the state—and this cycle, without Trump on the ballot, there’s no guarantee they’ll turn
out.

So at the same time Collins has been running her usual campaign of skipping to and from
ribbon-cuttings on fire stations and hospital wings, she’s reestablished some ties with the right.
She’s formed an alliance with former Gov. Paul LePage, the cantankerous proto-MAGA former governor
who is now running for the more GOP-friendly of Maine’s two House seats. The two have had a poor
relationship in the past, but this year, they need each other. She has supported the SAVE America
Act, the GOP’s strict voter verification and voter ID law which Democrats lambaste as a cloaked
effort at disenfranchisement.

RELATED FROM SLATE

IAN PRASAD PHILBRICK

HE SPENT A MONTH INVESTIGATING HOW SUSAN COLLINS KEEPS BEATING DEMOCRATS. HERE’S WHAT HE FOUND.

 READ MORE 
Collins has also leaned into the debate over trans issues. She’s supported an effort to put a
question on the November ballot that would require public school sports, bathrooms, showers, and
locker rooms to segregate by the sex assigned at birth. A benefit of such a question being on the
ballot would be to ensure MAGA turnout in the fall; billionaire Republican megadonor Richard
Uihlein, who is not from Maine but prefers to have a Senate Republican majority, financed the
effort. Bellows, now Maine’s secretary of state and a gubernatorial candidate, recently struck the
question from the ballot due to invalid signatures, a decision that’s now in court.

And as far as Trump goes, though, it appears that they’ve agreed to stay out of each other’s
way. His name barely ever comes out of her mouth. And someone seems, against all odds, to have
successfully drilled it into Trump’s head that it would be best to leave alone this senator who
once voted to convict him on impeachment charges if he wants to maintain control of the Senate.

“I hope she wins—she’s a good person actually—but we have to win,” Trump said in a
February interview on Fox News. “We have to keep the majority, otherwise all of the things we’ve
done are going to go down the tubes.”

You may have noticed that I am several thousand words into this piece and have barely mentioned
Graham Platner, Collins’ Democratic opponent. The last few weeks of news, with Platner’s history
of sexting and volatile relationships, have left Democrats everywhere wondering what’s next to
drop. Platner’s nomination could leave the question this piece seeks to answer—how does Susan
Collins do it?—with a simple answer for 2026: By drawing a deeply damaged opponent.

But is Platner a deeply damaged opponent? He’s already demonstrated a Teflon-like quality in the
face of earlier negative stories about his inappropriate Reddit posts and his Nazi tattoo. Just as
the Collins team believes Maine’s resistance to national trends will carry her to a sixth term,
Platner’s team is emphasizing the state’s independence to ward off a deluge of punishing
stories: that these are national stories by national publications with their own agendas that will
be greeted more skeptically by the free-thinking people of Maine. As some of Platner’s campaign
signs read, “They Don’t Know Maine.”

[Susan Collins smiles from behind a lectern and is wearing a red parka.]
[Susan Collins smiles from behind a lectern and is wearing a red parka.] Susan Collins announces
that her 2020 competitor, Sara Gideon, has called to concede. Scott Eisen/Getty Images
The immediate aftermath of Susan Collins’ 2020 win had an air of finality to it. National
Democrats had finally thrown the kitchen sink at Collins and not come particularly close.

“It felt like that was the last time anyone would bother trying to knock her off,” Lance Dutson,
the former consultant for Collins, told me. “She had succeeded in so many allegedly difficult
situations that there’s not too much more you could throw at her. But six years is an eternity in
politics. So here we are again.”

We’re here again not just because Democrats can’t resist another shot. There are two legends
surrounding her endurance that, by 2026, may have been outrun by the facts. The 2020 election
results, while an unquestionably impressive political feat, did not demonstrate that Collins is
invincible. And while many Mainers may believe they practice a form of political
exceptionalism—that there’s a “long-standing sense of Maine voters as being insulated from the
vicissitudes of Washington, D.C.,” as Dutson put it—it’s not clear that Maine is as divorced
from our national politics as either candidate would have you believe.

Collins’ 51 percent vote share in 2020 was her worst Senate election performance—it was 17
percentage points less than what she received in 2014. Her 9-point margin over Sara Gideon, too, was
more complicated than it appears. Lisa Savage, the Green-aligned independent candidate, earned 5
percent of the vote, and was instructing her supporters to rank Gideon second. The race never
reached a second round of counting since Collins—barely—cleared 50 percent in the first. The
final margin between those who did want Collins to be their senator for another six years and those
who didn’t might have been a lot closer than 9 points.

And this time, Susan Collins will be running in what could be the worst national environment for
Republicans since 2018, or even 2006.

But is Collins impervious to national trends, as the story goes? About that.

Everyone I spoke with in Maine for this story was uncommonly nice. Everyone shared phone numbers of
people they felt I should talk to. Several offered to host me or take me out for a beer. Bill Green
offered to take me out on his boat and show me a cool lighthouse. (Here’s the full list of
interviewees for any story who have ever offered to take me on their boat _or_ to show me a cool
lighthouse: Bill Green.) I admired the way they spoke with pride about their state and its
independent, contrarian, small-c conservative character, the way they like politicians who think for
themselves, and their resistance to national political trends, and that this distinctive character
could be responsible for Collins’ endurance.

And so I was dreading having to editorialize about this, but fortunately a pollster did it for me.

“Every state says that,” said Andy Smith, director of the University of New Hampshire Survey
Center, which runs the Pine Tree State Poll. “I think if you went to every state in the country
and asked, ‘Are you guys more independent or do you just follow the party line?,’ ” he said,
of course they’d call themselves independent. He noted that the number of “true” independents
is quite limited, most people are locked into their sides, and ticket-splitting is almost completely
gone from politics. Longtime incumbents, especially strong ones like Collins, are shielded from the
full effects of the great national polarization.

Until they aren’t. As much as Collins may wish there were and Mainers may believe there is,
there’s no force field around the state protecting it from this nationalized politics in the long
run—and there’s no force field protecting Platner from a pile of bad stories in the short run.
But Maine is a light-blue state, in a pro-Democrat national environment, in which Democrats
everywhere are on fire about what’s happening to the country. It would be foolish to say Susan
Collins can’t win again. But it also would be foolish to say she can’t lose.
