

====================================================================================================

Carrick, De Zerbi, Villa and Isak flop on opening weekend

====================================================================================================

Enzo Maresca almost joined Man Utd, Roberto De Zerbi and Alexander Isak in the losers column, but
the new City boss instead takes his place alongside Mikel Arteta and Hull City.

The Premier League returned this weekend following an off-season of sweeping change. But, almost
reassuringly, some things, like Man Utd being predictable and Spurs being weak, remain exactly as
they were.

Here are your Winners and Losers from matchday one…

PREMIER LEAGUE WINNERS

Hull City
 HULL’S SEASON WAS UNANIMOUSLY WRITTEN OFF ON THESE AND MOST OTHER PAGES before it had begun, and
though their 2-0 win over Manchester United won’t prompt many to radically alter their
predictions, it might make some change a DISMISSIVE, ALMOST-DISRESPECTFUL TONE.

Hull will win more points than many expect if they are consistent with the industry and organisation
coaxed by Sergej Jakirovic that United couldn’t match at Saturday lunchtime.

Set up in a 5-4-1, they looked exceptionally-well coached and disciplined, while causing the Red
Devils problems they couldn’t solve when they hosts got the opportunity to deliver set-pieces or
drop the ball in behind Michael Carrick’s defence.

They were better prepared than United, seemingly fitter, and certainly appeared more motivated,
despite Carrick’s denial.

“The secret today was that our boys were dying to win,” Hull’s owner Acun Ilicali told _The
Athletic._ “I didn’t see Manchester United in this mood. That was the separation of these two
teams. You look at the tackles in the game and you could understand which team was wanting more.”

It is often too simple at this level to attribute victory and defeat to desire – CARRICK REJECTED
THE NOTION – but Hull certainly gave the impression they wanted the points more. Maintaining this
drive, organisation and ruthlessness with limited chances will at least make them more competitive
in the top flight than anyone outside Humberside expects.

Mikel Arteta
 As Arsenal’s title rivals highlight their own flaws while spending a billion to close to the gap
on the Gunners, ARTETA’S SQUAD APPEARS LIBERATED BY THE END OF THEIR TITLE DROUGHT AND REINFORCED
BY FRESH IMPETUS brought by new arrivals. Including…

Christos Tzolis
 Arsenal’s new winger was viewed as a squad-bolstering signing but first glimpses suggest he could
be a difference-maker.

Tzolis was razor sharp against Coventry. Especially in the first half when he made Milan van
Ewijk’s Premier League debut a misery.

Technically, Tzolis was too good for Coventry’s left-back and he showed the tactical acumen Arteta
will love when recognising the times to stay wide and when to run inside and across the Sky Blues’
backline, ensuring the rest of Frank Lampard’s back four got a taste of the dust Van Ewijk was
choking on.

Tzolis and Riccardo Calafiori dovetailed wonderfully well, the Italian full-back regularly driving
forward and inside when the winger hugged the touchline. Refreshingly, Tzolis also appears able to
go both ways around his full-back – a trait too rare at the top level these days.

Arsenal have spent much of the summer being linked with Vinicius Jr and Bradley Barcola, with Tzolis
bought apparently as a back-up. But his early impression suggests he’s too good just to be a
stand-in.

Arsenal deserve credit for recognising Tzolis’s quality. Many Big Six sides might have waited for
a Brighton or a Bournemouth to buy the £34million winger before flipping for double the price. But
the Gunners identified the 24-year-old as ready to take the leap without a step.

MORE: ARSENAL COMBINE CHAMPIONS’ SWAGGER WITH FRESH FERVOUR IN OMINOUS OPENER

Mamadou Sangare
 When everyone waited for Sandro Tonali to prove his worth as Spurs’ record signing, it was
Brentford’s who looked like the £100million star.

THE STATS SUGGESTED THE BEES BAGGED THEMSELVES A BARGAIN, even at £38million, and Sangare’s
signing has been widely hailed as a very astute piece of business by plenty of pundits who watched
the 24-year-old at Lens.

But few of those expecting big things from the Mali midfielder were entitled to expect them quite so
soon.

Sangare was outstanding on his Premier League debut – so good that it ought to prompt an inquiry
over how Brentford had almost a free run at him this summer. No wonder they were so willing to wave
off Jordan Henderson when they had Sangare ready to step in and upgrade Keith Andrews’ engine
room.

All the signs suggest Sangare’s dominant display, featuring one brilliant assist and another of a
sort, was no fluke. As good on the ball as he is at winning it, he’ll be so much fun to watch this
term before the big boys clamour to give Brentford at least a 100 percent return on their investment
inside a year.

Enzo Maresca
 With six minutes to go of his first match in charge of Manchester City, Maresca was firmly in the
other column. He might still have been viewed a loser had Bournemouth left the Etihad with a point.
But Josko Gvardiol’s 92nd-minute winner gave Maresca early cause for celebration and a foundation
from which to build.

The new manager’s first team selection was A NOT-SO-SUBTLE CRY FOR HELP. If City hadn’t already
agreed a deal with Lille for Ayyoub Bouaddi, the sight of Marc Guehi in midfield, despite Nico
Gonzalez and Mateo Kovacic being on the bench, would have spurred them to do the necessary.

Guehi made a passable holding midfielder, wisely keeping it simple but City struggled with their
backline where the England centre-back usually operates and, presumably, will return to when he
visits Selhurst Park to face former club Palace on Friday night.

Gvardiol pushed on to press, dragging Rico Lewis inside from an already unfamiliar right-back
position, giving Bournemouth plenty of joy with switches of play or balls behind.

With City one down at the break, missing chances while susceptible at the back, Maresca’s opener
was beginning to feel like the type of game that caused Pep Guardiola so much angst last season.

To get out of it with three points; the imminent arrival of one top-class midfielder; a clear
illustration to the board of where else City need to strengthen; and the euphoria of a last-gasp
winner makes Maresca a big winner.

MORE: MAN CITY MIDFIELD MESS PERSISTS AFTER GUEHI EXPERIMENT, BUT BOUADDI COULD JOIN JUST IN TIME

Rayan Cherki
 Maresca left Cherki on the bench, starting Nico O’Reilly as City’s attacking midfielder. And
Cherki took that personally…

In Maresca’s words, he had an “unbelievable impact” after replacing O’Reilly just after the
hour, setting up both City goals.

His second assist, showcasing the kind of composure, vision and technique that makes Cherki so
special, was his 12th in open play since the start of last season – no player has more.

Maresca may feel he got the best out of Cherki by keeping him in reserve but that’s not a
sustainable man-management approach to the French maverick. Cherki deserves greater prominence,
regardless of what City do before the deadline.

Brighton
 Yes, Villa have been plundered of many of their best players from last season and were missing
others to injury. But Brighton can point to similar problems. Rather than dwell on them, the
Seagulls simply blew away the Villans by becoming the fastest team in 20 years to go 4-0 up on the
opening day.

Much of the praise for Brighton requires the context of Villa’s implosion. More on that later.

But the Seagulls were ruthless in exploiting their visitors’ self-sabotage. Maxim De Cuyper,
thrust forward on the left wing by Fabian Hurzeler, prompted Victor Lindelof’s early own-goal;
scored the second himself; then had a hand in Jack Hinselwood’s first of two goals in as many
minutes.

Brighton could have had more after the break but Hurzeler won’t dwell on that from the Premier
League summit. The manager was able to bed in two new boys – Zadok Yohanna and Costinha – from
the bench, with Luka Vuskovic the only summer signing to start.

Even without much fresh impetus, the more seasoned Seagulls showed why Brighton continue to evolve
each season despite continually having their best players picked off by the big boys. They are old
hands at this and it’s not for everyone. Villa can only watch and learn.

Yoane Wissa
 So good was Wissa’s breakout performance for Newcastle, it was almost worth the year-long wait.

The Toon forward was named Man of the Match after Liverpool failed to get to grips with a player
WRITTEN OFF IN MANY CIRCLES AS A £55MILLION FLOP.

That was not an unreasonable conclusion from his first campaign at St James’ Park, a season
ravaged by injury, compounded by the suspicion the Congo star was putting the World Cup before his
obligations towards the club who badly needed him.

The World Cup offered Newcastle fans a tantalising glimpse of what Wissa is capable of before he led
Liverpool a merry dance in different roles.

He started as a 10, playing off William Osula before replacing the substituted Dane as the spearhead
of Matthias Jaissle’s attack.

Wissa had led the line for barely a minute when he took the ball 30 yards from his own goal before
driving half the length of the pitch, shattering Liverpool’s midfield screen on his way to set up
Newcastle’s second, wonderfully taken by Joe Willock.

The only criticism of Wissa was his failure to add a goal of his own from two very good chances to
give Newcastle breathing space before they were reined in by the Reds at the death.

Jaissle’s men would have been good value for the win they came so close to claiming. Ending their
Liverpool hoodoo would have been the perfect start for the new manager but there was enough in their
performance to be encouraged by at the start of a new era.

New goalkeeper Lucas Hornicek was a very safe pair of hands; there was a lot to like in the dynamic
between Sean Steur and Lewis Miley in midfield; while Jaissle’s desire for wingers Anthony Elanga
and Harvey Barnes to burst beyond was evident.

Wissa, though, was Newcastle’s biggest positive, especially given the extent to which expectations
of him had fallen.

Julio Enciso
 The striker he replaced as Ipswich’s record signing scored the first and the winger who replaced
him as a substitute notched Town’s last-gasp winner. But Enciso was the star of the Portman Road
show as the Tractor Boys illustrated a side we never saw of them in the Premier League two seasons
ago.

The £26million recruit from Strasbourg skipped through Sunderland almost at will in possession,
while out of it, he suffocated Granit Xhaka.

“He’s a no.10 who can produce unbelievable quality, but not many 10s in the world are willing to
work the way he works,” said Gary O’Neil, quick to claim the credit for “working hard with him
in Strasbourg” on the defensive side of his game.

That will be crucial given how much time Ipswich are expected to spend without the ball this season.
But they seem to have a player more capable than most of creating openings with what possession they
do have.

Anton Stach
 Stach has now scored four direct free-kicks in the Premier League since his arrival last summer.
Only Dominik Szoboszlai is in the Leeds’ star’s league, with no-one else on even half the
midfield duo’s tally.

This latest effort was timed to perfection, earning Leeds a late win at Forest to RAMP UP THE 99%
OPTIMISM TO THE MAX.

Jordan Pickford
 There was plenty to like from Everton in their first opening day win since 2021.

The Toffees were better in both boxes than Palace, who had more possession but were picked off on
the break by their hosts.

Harrison Armstrong and Hayden Hackney were impressive in a somewhat makeshift midfield, while
Kiernan Dewsbury-Hall and Thierno Barry both got on the scoresheet, flanked by impressive shifts out
wide from Iliman Ndiaye and Tyrique George.

But Everton would not have had a platform for victory without Pickford’s brilliant early save.

Back from a World Cup that highlighted once more HOW UNDERAPPRECIATED HE IS AS ENGLAND’S NO.1,
Pickford left Eddie Nketiah bereft with a diving stop to his left to push the Palace forward’s
shot from eight yards on to the post.

Given the game state at that moment, Pickford’s save was as crucial as either of Everton’s
goals.

PREMIER LEAGUE LOSERS

Aston Villa
 Villa became only the second team in Premier League history to concede four goals, receive a red
card and score an own goal in the first half of a match. The first team: Southampton at Manchester
United in February 2021 when the Saints lost 9-0.

That Villa were not embarrassed to a similar extent was the single positive on a humbling, sobering
afternoon at the AmEx.

Much of VILLA’S PRE-SEASON OPTIMISM SEEMED TO BE ROOTED JUST IN THE SHEER AURA OF EMERY. Sure, the
boss has earned some blind faith but what manager could see the spine ripped out of a successful
side and realistically maintain expectations of progress, or even just hope to stand still?

It is hard to pinpoint when on Sunday that hope gave way to fear among the travelling Villans. The
first sight of the team-sheet, with no recognised striker, ought to have been the moment but clarity
could be dodged no longer come half-time.

By then, VILLA WERE 4-0 DOWN AND A MAN LIGHT after one of their most-anticipated new signings
endured one of the worst debuts in Premier League history.

Even allowing for all the exits and injuries Villa have had to contend with, their first half was
inexcusable. Brighton swept through them with alarming ease for their second and third goals; the
first and fourth were appalling acts of self-sabotage.

At least they stemmed the bleeding after the break. And perhaps being architects in their own
downfall to such an extent is some weird consolation since simply not being this dreadful again
ought to be an easy fix.

But Emery is looking at a chaotic mess on and off the pitch. His pre-match silence in response to a
question over Ollie Watkins’ absence was an ominous sign, and as the authority figure, the king at
Villa Park, Emery has a huge week ahead of him to build a squad for the longer term and immediately
shape a team to restore some order and optimism.

MORE: ASTON VILLA CRISIS EXPOSED AS £38M MAN HAS DEBUT FROM HELL AT BRIGHTON

Joao Gomes
 Perhaps the worst-ever Premier League debut lasted 40 minutes, in which time Gomes was cautioned
once; dodged a second; gave away a goal; and received a laughably stupid straight red card that
means he won’t be seen again for almost four weeks.

When Emery put hands on Gomes as he left the stage in shame, it was to hug the new signing. Given
the Villa manager’s mood, it could just as easily have been to throttle him.

Roberto De Zerbi
 The Tottenham Hotspur boss could only field a team two-thirds complete before Spurs sign two,
probably three forwards in the coming week. But, by Brentford, THEY WERE MADE TO LOOK MUCH, MUCH
FURTHER FROM THE FINISHED ARTICLE.

Some of that is on the manager. His team selection featured plenty of technical quality but little
in the way of physical power to at least match Brentford’s.

The Bees ran over Spurs, denying the visitors any platform to build and play, which was illustrated
all too starkly by the hosts’ second goal just after the half hour.

Richarlison, rarely comfortable with his back to goal, dropped deep to receive from his goalkeeper
but Kristoffer Ajer pinched possession, prompting a duel between Lucas Bergvall and Mathias Jensen.

Bergvall inexcusably lost an 80/20, allowing Jensen to stride forward and an unleash a shot that
Antonin Kinsky parried straight into the path of Vitaly Janelt. Ten seconds after comfortable
possession at the keeper’s feet, the ball was in his net.

Bergvall was hooked at half-time along with Conor Gallager – a curious pick in the no.10 position.
But what little hope Spurs had was extinguished within four minutes of the restart.

Few will judge De Zerbi while his rebuild remains this far from finished and Spurs have players to
return from injury as well as signings to complete. But teams with Tottenham’s ambitions and
resources have to find a way to win, or at the very least compete, along the way.

The prospects of achieving even that bare minimum on opening day were hindered by De Zerbi’s
decisions.

MORE: DE ZERBI’S BRAVE NEW ERA IMMEDIATELY REACHES TEN HAG LEVELS OF IMPOSSIBLY, TERRIBLY SPURS

Michael Carrick
 “Oh, come on, that’s ridiculous,” replied Carrick when asked after the defeat if he would he
accept that United displayed a “lack of passion” in the first half at Hull.

Only, it wasn’t that ridiculous to anyone who watched the Red Devils fail to break down or
seriously bother the side who finished sixth in the Championship last season.

“Just because you get beaten, it doesn’t mean you don’t care about it,” continued Carrick,
and no one could say United weren’t arsed. But they did lack the necessary intensity that could be
confused for passion.

And, perhaps more worryingly, Carrick still lacks a Plan B beyond Bruno being brilliant for when his
side struggle to penetrate low blocks.

Even through the 17-game run that secured Carrick the permanent job, United were too easy to stifle
by opponents willing to sit in and wait.

Which is exactly what Hull did, executing to the letter what will become a well-used game plan this
season – by the Tigers and plenty of United’s other opponents given how obvious it is as a
weakness.

Hull also observed a flaw in how United defend set-pieces, especially free-kicks from flanks of the
type which gave the hosts their second goal.

Carrick failed to address these obvious flaws through the summer, leaving him just a week to come up
with remedies since Ipswich Town will almost certainly use Hull’s blueprint when they go to Old
Trafford on Sunday.

MORE: MAN UTD’S GREAT PREMIER LEAGUE TITLE CHALLENGE OF 2026/27 IS FINALLY OVER AFTER AWFUL DEBUTS

ALEXANDER ISAK

> “I value that he continued pushing and fighting throughout the game.”

Liverpool’s new boss there, patting the club’s record signing on the head for trying.

Andoni Iraola has numerous problems as his first summer as Reds boss approaches its end, but raising
the bar for Isak has to be among his priorities.

Going back to Newcastle, the Swedish striker knew to expect a rough ride, BUT HE HAD OPPORTUNITIES
TO SILENCE THE GEORDIES WHO JEERED HIS EVERY TOUCH.

Isak missed two big chances among four attempts on the Toon goal, scoring none from an xG of 1.3 in
a continuation of the form that rendered his first season at Liverpool a flop.

For that, there was some mitigation. He arrived on deadline day unfit having spent most of last
summer on strike then sat out four months with a broken leg. He did, though, manage 22 appearances
that produced only four goals.

Isak’s summer was well spent at the World Cup and the hope at Anfield is that the striker is ready
to kick on. The Reds certainly need him to with Hugo Ekitike still months from a return.

But the lack of a cutting edge against his former side prompted memories of his struggles last
season more than optimism for the one to come.

THE SAME GOES FOR FLORIAN WIRTZ. But even more pressing than his £100m-plus strugglers, Iraola
needs to find a midfield balance to prevent Liverpool from being ripped apart on the break.

Newcastle’s opener was woefully easy to come by as the hosts tore through the heart of Liverpool
with no resistance. And even when the Reds had bodies in place to stop the counter that led to the
Magpies’ second, worryingly, they appeared to lack the will.

Crystal Palace
 New manager, same old problems.

Pierre Sage watched Palace waste three clear-cut chances before falling behind to Everton. They
ended with 2.04 xG, their highest in a game in which they failed to score since December 2018. All
of which allowed the Toffees to grow into a game they should have been out of.

Sage had replaced his starting front three just after the hour and his attacking woes are
intensified by doubts over the futures of Ismaila Sarr – injured on Saturday, apparently – and
Jean-Philippe Mateta.

It is tough for Sage to make a tangible impact amid so much uncertainty around Palace prior to the
deadline. But the Frenchman must come up with quick solutions to their profligacy, especially while
they remain porous at the back.

Without fixes at either end, the attractive football played between the boxes counts for little.

Oliver Glasner
 Glasner became the fifth consecutive Forest manager to lose his first Premier League game in
charge. But unlike the four before him, there isn’t – yet – the urgent need for immediate
results.

Forest were good value for a draw against Leeds and lost to a set-piece that perhaps ought to have
been kept out.

“I can’t come with my staff and we lay our hands on the shoulders of these players and all of a
sudden we can play like Real Madrid,” said Glasner entirely reasonably. But, as he knows, he
isn’t working for a reasonable man.

Glasner is building something at the City Ground, but he will quickly need tangible pieces of
progress to point towards to keep Mr Marinakis from reverting to his basic instincts.

Carl Rushworth
 Finally, Premier League clubs seem to have caught on to the fact that they need goalkeepers who can
save shots rather than playmakers in mitts. Which feels especially important for the promoted clubs.

All three spent big on keepers this summer, with Coventry and Hull making club-record signings to
guard their goal.

Hull’s Konstantinos Tzolakis debuted with a clean sheet against Manchester United and Kjell
Scherpen made a winning start for Ipswich.

Rushworth, though, was at fault for at least one of the three goals Coventry conceded at Arsenal.

Gary Neville called out the keeper for his inadvertent assist for Bukayo Saka – somewhat harshly
in our view. But we can’t defend Rushworth for failing to keep out Martin Odegaard’s almost
apologetic attempt early in the second half.

Sunderland
 Shot themselves in each bollock in either half of an easily-avoidable defeat at Portman Road.

Both Ipswich goals came from cheap turnovers, the first offered up by Luke O’Nien to spark another
debate among Black Cats over whether their long-serving defender should still have such prominence.

O’Nien was hooked for Omar Alderete who made a similar mistake compounded by the fact it came in
the 90th minute, teeing up Jack Clarke to sink his former club.

Just frustratingly sloppy all round from Sunderland.
