

====================================================================================================

Ivanka Trump—and Everyone Else—Sees One European Country as the Next Mediterranean Tourist Mecca. I Went to See Why People Are So Mad.

====================================================================================================

The “potential” of this Albanian island, called Sazan, is to become a luxury villa resort, and
Trump has embarked upon this real estate project with her husband, Jared Kushner. The endeavor,
worth $1.4 billion, would render many acres of Albania’s coastline unrecognizable. Because in
addition to what the couple wants to build on Sazan, they are proposing to build 10,000 luxury
villas on the Zvernec peninsula, which lies opposite the island. Never mind that the peninsula is
currently an ecologically protected area known as the Vjosa Narta, including a river delta and
lagoon that is home to hundreds of species of birds, including flamingos. They are doing it anyway,
with the blessing of a government whose motivations have, shall we say, come under question.

That’s the one bit of trouble with Ivanka Trump’s little project: The people of Albania are
very, very angry about it. The development has provoked fury all summer and sparked the biggest
outbreak of civil unrest since communism collapsed in the country 35 years ago, in what has now been
dubbed, relevantly, the Flamingo Revolution. Even the European Union has gotten involved, and not on
the side of the trailblazing couple. The world has never seen a movement quite like this.

The uprising is a sight to behold, and this summer I went to Albania and beheld it. What I found is
that this is not just a protest of one project in one area by one couple of American elites. Albania
is a country on the cusp of becoming a tourist mecca, the next hot spot for international beachgoers
to descend upon in their quest to soak up the sun and dip in the turquoise Mediterranean Sea. But
the people who already live there have been scarred by decades of communism and now decades of the
dodgy capitalism that replaced it. A dynastic couple calling in their orders for the country’s
future from Florida is just the beginning. In Albania, I found a story with roots that go much
deeper than anything that has happened this summer.

[Lots of people are gathered and one is holding a large inflatable flamingo; others have signs in
Albanian.]
[Lots of people are gathered and one is holding a large inflatable flamingo; others have signs in
Albanian.] 
A routine was established over this summer for many in Tirana, Albania’s capital. Every single
night at 7, once work is over and the peak of the day’s fierce heat is done, city residents turn
out on the streets to protest. As I left my hotel, the television in the lobby was playing rolling
news coverage of the protests. I told the receptionist at the front desk where I was going, and she
said she felt guilty that she couldn’t be there herself, because of her evening shift. “But in
my heart, I am there,” she said, pointing to the screen.

I met up with Olsi Nika, the founder of the environmental organization EcoAlbania, at a café on
Tirana’s central Skanderbeg Square, where he was treating his 6-year-old son to a fior di latte
ice cream ahead of that evening’s protests. EcoAlbania and other environmental groups have been
fighting this fight since 2021, when rumblings first emerged about the sale of Sazan island and the
Vjosa Narta area. What tipped this into a national movement, at the end of May this year, was a
video clip taken just outside Zvernec village. Locals came out to the edge of the construction site,
a fenced-off area they’d been given no warning about, and made their unhappiness about
construction on their land known. The security protecting the site dragged an older local resident
to the ground. It was caught on camera and went viral across the country. After that, not just a
small group of dedicated environmentalists was aware of the development. Everybody was. And they
were furious about it.

Olsi and his fellow activists have reasons to be hopeful that they might actually stop all this from
happening. They’ve already succeeded in persuading the government to designate the Vjosa Narta
river area as a national park. That happened back in 2023, after nine years of campaigning, and
halted the construction of a hydropower dam that would have damaged the ecosystem. Now this new
battle has prompted a lot of additional support, though Olsi still has the specificity of a
long-committed activist. When I referred to the luxury resort as a tourism development, he corrected
me: “It’s just making money, it’s not about the development of tourism,” he said. That’s
one thing my time in Albania clarified to me: Albanians aren’t necessarily anti-tourism. They’re
anti–_this_ tourism. “It would be fine if it wasn’t in protected areas, but they want to
urbanize—badly, in my opinion—the last pristine river delta in the Mediterranean,” Olsi said.

We arrived at the demonstration, which had gathered near the Pyramid of Tirana—once a museum to
Communist-era leader Enver Hoxha and now a cultural and community center—at a quarter past 8. On
the first days of protest, there were about 100,000 people crowding this central street, which
stretches from Skanderbeg Square down to the Polytechnic University of Tirana, a distance of almost
a mile. This was the 49th day of consecutive protests, and there were still many thousands of people
turning out each night, draped in Albanian flags. They’re in it for the long haul—there is a
sense of orderliness, of anger and energy being spent judiciously to preserve stamina. A woman, an
architect in her 40s holding a Styrofoam lawn flamingo on a stick, told me she’d come every single
day so far. I asked her how long she was planning to keep coming down. She blinked at the question.
“Until we see the difference,” she said.

These protests have been overwhelmingly peaceful—family-oriented, even. At the edge of the crowd,
a clutch of children were all drawing flamingos on a long piece of cardboard on the ground, and many
people held pink flamingos on sticks. Groups of young people paraded around carrying banners with
slogans such as “New Albania” and “Edi Rama Resign.”

What was noticeably absent was any reference to Ivanka Trump.

Maybe that was an intentional rebuttal to the way the powers that be have attempted to dismiss the
movement. Edi Rama, Albania’s prime minister, approved the project and welcomed it with open arms
and has tried to pass off the objections as stemming from anti-Trump sentiment. “If it were not
Jared Kushner … nobody would give a shit about flamingos, about Albania, about nothing,” he
told the Financial Times in June. On the ground, though, the people protesting in Albania are
against something much bigger. There are no anti-Trump signs, no anti-Trump slogans. The Trump
connection may have attracted international attention, but Jared and Ivanka are almost beside the
point.

In fact, more so than practically anywhere else in Europe, sentiment in Albania toward America is
pretty positive. Their loyalty runs deep: Woodrow Wilson defended Albanian independence from the
Ottoman Empire in 1919, and in 1999, the U.S. intervened in the ethnic cleansing of Albanians in
Kosovo led by Serbian war criminal Slobodan Milosevic. Many here see America as a lighthouse of
Western democratic values. “Because of America, Albania exists,” as one local put it to me.
“For the last 100 years, they have been supporting us.”

I gradually began to realize that despite the flamingo as an organizing symbol, these protests
aren’t even really about Sazan or the Zvernec development. That was just the last straw. At the
edge of the crowd, I ran into Redi Muci, a member of the Albanian parliament for the left-wing party
Lëvizja Bashkë, which translates as the “Together Movement,” and the party’s leader, Arlind
Qori. “The main reason why Albanians are protesting is basically an economic model of very
autocratic ruling of one man, Edi Rama, who is surrounded by a group of economic oligarchs,” Muci
said. Yes, the idea that Ivanka Trump could waltz in and buy an island that is actually a nationally
protected ecological treasure thanks to corruption sticks in the craw—but Albanians have been
living undercorruption at a much larger, societal scale for years, thanks to their own leaders.

“One of the most popular slogans in this protest has been ‘Albania is not for sale,’ ” Qori
told me, “which means our resources, our nature, our environment, but also our democratic and
representative institutions, they belong to the Albanian people, not to the Albanian corrupt
government.”

Rama’s government is now in its fourth term. Once Tirana’s mayor, he became prime minister in
2013, after a campaign that ran on the promise of an “Albanian renaissance.” What he has
delivered, many here think, is something decidedly less glorious.

In recent years, Rama has had two primary focuses: to get Albania into the European Union, and to
attract investment. These are both fine—even positive—goals. Albania is one of the poorest
countries in Europe. The average salary is just $1,000 per month. This is a country that needs
money. But Rama has pursued profitfor those willing to invest at the expense of sustainable economic
development, many here told me. Endless construction projects are pitched, plumped up with promises
of jobs and money for the local economy. Then they get started and turn out to be something else
entirely.

[A woman talks close to the clear riot guard held by one of a line of police officers in Albania.]
[A woman talks close to the clear riot guard held by one of a line of police officers in Albania.] 
“The real estate system of Albania is broadly connected with organized crime and with money
laundering,” Qori said. So projects get started, but only because the initial plans and proposals
help money get flowing—and then they don’t conclude. He pointed at the high-rises around us, in
which there were no lights on in the windows: “Ninety percent of these offices are uninhabited.
They are just empty. There are no businesses there.” I asked him who owned the buildings.
“Corrupted politicians, economic oligarchs, drug traffickers. The scum of the earth in terms of,
you know, criminal and antisocial interests.” A 2024 report by the Global Initiative Against
Transnational Organized Crime found that more than two-thirds of high-rise construction companies in
Tirana, the sorts of companies that had built the high-rises visible all around us at the protest,
lacked both bank credit and verified financial capacity, which are taken as glaring warning signs
that their funding comes from under-the-table illegal sources. But it’s in the interest of the
government to approve these projects. More than half of Tirana’s municipal budget comes from
revenue from construction permits and taxes.

The Vjosa Narta development, many believe, is just another chapter in the same story. “The way
they finance it, and make it make sense financially, is if it’s villas that are super luxurious
and very high-priced,” Muci said.

“It’s not even a business for me,” Ivanka claimed on that podcast about her island
project—but it certainly will be for some, and likely a grubby one. The Albanian public prosecutor
has preventatively frozen the bank accounts of two of the non-Trump investors financing the project,
Syrian billionaire brothers Moutaz and Ramez Al-Khayyat. The reason is that in the eyes of the law,
the brothers had no right to buy this land in the first place.

The story of who actually owns the land on the Zvernec peninsula, where Kushner and company are
planning their villas, is a long and messy one. During communism, all land in Albania was
collectivized. After communism’s fall, people all over Albania received titles to the property
where they lived, once the land was not all de facto owned by the state. In Zvernec, because it was
a rigidly protected area for environmental conservation by law, people did receive titles, but those
titles didn’t permit them to develop their property however they wanted. Then suddenly, in 2006,
people in Zvernec learned that their land was now officially registered to a Miami-based Albanian
businessman (and suspected gangster) named Artur Shehu, who has some very dodgy-seeming claims to
ancestry in the area that would grant him landownership in the same way as the residents. Kushner
and Trump seem to have bought the peninsula from Shehu, if indirectly. (In a statement to the Wall
Street Journal, Shehu’s lawyer, Kujtim Cakrani, has said that Shehu “is neither a drug dealer
nor a land thief, and he never dealt directly with Kushner—only acting through an
intermediary.”)

The Zvernec residents have already been battling this appropriation of their land in the courts for
20 years, so in many ways, the Kushner development is just the latest twist. While they’ve won
various stages of this legal fight, the court has perpetually dragged its feet on a final decision,
and in Albania, when a legal decision is not formalized, the case can be nullified and they have to
start again from scratch.Which means that everyone is on edge about how this will go. Plus, the once
rock-solid legislation forbidding construction in vulnerable environmental areas like these was
overturned by Rama in December 2024 to make the land available for development after all, just in
time for the Kushner project to come along.

This helps explain how everything added up into a feeling I found to be universal among Albanians:
Enough is enough. As I spoke with Muci and Qori, a chant went up calling for Edi Rama to go to
prison. The crowd also called for the same treatment of Sali Berisha, which was notable because
Berisha is the opposition leader. He was president between 1997 and 2005. But his premiership was
marred by his own corruption scandals, and no one sees him as a solution. The people gathered here
don’t just want to get rid of Rama in favor of the other guy. They want a full-scale
reconstruction of Albanian democracy.

So far, Rama seems unmoved by protests against his government. He says the development will be going
ahead. “I tell them, ‘Fuck you,’ ” he said in the Financial Times June interview. “That
simple.”

[Lots of people waving Albanian flags gathered on a beach.]
[Lots of people waving Albanian flags gathered on a beach.] 
To really understand the scale of what is being proposed by Kushner, Trump, and their partners, you
have to go to the site itself. The following morning, bright and early to beat the heat, Olsi drove
me the two hours from Tirana to the Vjosa Narta delta, which lies just north of the coastal city of
Vlore. Eighty percent of the bird species in Albania can be found here, across sand dunes, pine
forest, and a lagoon that stretches over 16 square miles. As we neared the lagoon, a black-winged
stilt flew alongside the car, trailing its legs behind it. We got out at the northwestern edge of
the lagoon, where there are swaths of land that have been churned up by heavy machinery, stretches
of gravel, and remnants of fencing. This is where construction started on May 5 and continued for
three weeks, until the scale of the protests brought it to a temporary halt. Hastily put-together
surveying is apparently being done now in an attempt to placate the development’s detractors. Olsi
reckoned it would probably start up again in the autumn, though, regardless of those survey results.
“It’s like barbarians,” Olsi said as we walked past a tree that looked as if it had been
hacked at by a chain saw.

There was the chirping of cicadas and the crunch of desiccated pine needles underfoot, but the most
remarkable thing about the place was the quiet. Olsi produced some binoculars and showed me egrets,
plovers, ducks, cormorants, bee-eaters, a pelican. Out in the distance, four flamingos were picking
their way through the lagoon. The protected area is enormous, encompassing everything we could see
through our binoculars from there.

There’s a reason for that.

“Lagoons are the most delicate ecosystem on the planet,” Olsi said as a small white butterfly
traced his outline, “because the water exchange is fragile, the fresh and the salt water. Already,
fish are dying because of small changes that the existing construction works have made.”

We drove past an undeveloped beach—no facilities, just a handful of people taking a dip—and up
to a viewpoint where there was a military outpost containing one soldier and his dog. From there,
you can see the entire area of the proposed development, acres and acres of it, including the
stretch of unspoiled white-sand beach between the lagoon and the sea that we’d just driven
past.The thing is that the coast _is_ gorgeous. As we wound our way down the seaside road, the
waters were calm and pristine beside us. But for the signs in Albanian, we could have been on the
Amalfi Coast, or the Côte d’Azur, except that it has not yet been overrun with bachelorettes and
party buses. That view, unlike a similar one in Spain, is not yet spoiled by parasols and
day-trippers’ detritus.

Albania has something here that people all over the world want. At the viewpoint, Olsi got out his
phone and pulled up the resort proposals, holding the map against the landscape. If Kushner and Co.
have their way, all of it will be villas. As we looked out over the bay, its turquoise edges giving
out to darker blue, Olsi pointed at a hump of land rising out of the water. “Ivanka’s private
island,” he said darkly. As Jared Kushner put it to one magazine, the Dial, that island is where
“I’d want to be at with my family and with my friends.” It was as telling a comment as any
he’s given about the project. This will not be a normal hotel, is what he was clarifying. It will
cater to the ultrawealthy—and will almost certainly mean that local Albanians have much more
limited access to the area.

Ivanka or not, tourism is coming for this corner of the Mediterranean. Tired of the overcrowded
beaches of Italy, Greece, and Spain, savvy developers are looking for new stretches of the coastline
and have landed on Albania. The city of Vlore is a central point on the burgeoning tourist trail of
what is sometimes called the Albanian Riviera. Around 77,000 people live here, but that number
already triples during the summer due to incoming holidaymakers. Once a working-class port city, now
Vlore has a beachfront lined with ritzy bars, restaurants catering to tourists, and blocks of
hotels.

A fully-fledged tourist city, Vlore is also about to get its own dedicated airport. One is being
merrily constructed in the middle of a protected area; it was supposed to be finished in 2024 but,
true to Albanian form, is still only half complete. Whether the airport can in fact legally be
constructed is being contested in the courts even as the runways get tarmacked.

In 2023, Albania landed the distinction of being fourth in the world for the highest increase in
percentage of international tourist visits, a 56 percent jump over 2019. This is a big leap in a
new direction for any country, but particularly for a country like Albania. The nation is extremely
young when it comes to being capitalist and Westernized at all. Albania gained independence from the
Ottoman Empire in 1912 and became a monarchy. After the Second World War, Enver Hoxha ushered in a
severely isolated and repressive Communist regime. Communism fell in 1991, and the country has
gradually, shakily established itself as a market economy and democracy.

In her memoir _Free_, about growing up in communist Albania, Lea Ypi, now 46, writes that during her
childhood, Coca-Cola cans, unavailable in the food-stamp shops where Albanians could get their
goods, were prized as heirlooms and displayed in pride of place on a family’s mantelpiece. Wealthy
tourists would have felt like visitors from another solar system. Albania was sometimes called
Europe’s North Korea, so cut off was it from the rest of the continent. The transition to
parliamentary democracy over the past 36 years has been far from easy. One person I met in Vlore
told me he remembered aid packages being flown in from Italy full of long-expired pasta. Everyone
over 35 remembers the bloody civil war of 1997—and those younger grew up in its shadow. To go from
that to the proposed high-end beach clubs and already present budget-airline weekenders involves
extreme whiplash.

Still, Albanians see tourism’s potential for their country. But for the country’s
counterparts—Portugal, Italy, Greece, Spain—tourism _is_ the focus of protests by locals because
overtourism is driving up the cost of living and crowding them out of their homes. These more
developed countries have served as a warning for Albania: What the locals here realize is that they
still have time to approach their coastal fortunes differently. They seek to disabuse their leaders
of the fantasy that tourism will be a magic bullet that will somehow bring sustainable economic
development to the area.

To get a better idea of what the Albanian Riviera currently looks like, I took a trip down the
coastline from Vlore with a man named Aulon Harizaj in his old banger of a VW Polo. Aulon, 38, was
born and bred here in Vlore. He had been thinking of going abroad to study mechanical engineering,
in Italy or Denmark, but then the protests began, and he decided to stay for the time being and do
his part.

“You know the boiling-frog experiment?” he said as he smoked a cigar out of the car’s open
window. “We have been through something like that, politically.” The temperature was slowly
rising for some time, then there was that video of the local man being dragged by the police out of
the construction fence in Zvernec. Suddenly, the frog jumped out of the pot.

“That was when everything exploded. On a personal level, we felt betrayed, but on a broader level,
we felt treasoned,” he told me. He railed against Rama’s audacity in offering up parts of
Albania for sale at business meetings with men in suits. “How can you sell a piece of the country
over a coffee table?”

As we drove down to Orikum, a beach town south of Vlore, Aulon spoke at length about the other times
they’ve been promised benefits from luxury tourist resorts that never materialized. “We’ve had
Palase Green Coast, which turned natural landscape into villas and hotels, which produced nothing
but waste and ugliness.” The resort was finished, but jobs in particular never really opened up
for local people around that development. “It’s mostly manned by Filipino workers, and compared
to Albanians they are underpaid, and the conditions they find themselves in? Appalling, to say the
least. Some of them have their passports locked into safes,” he told me.

Not only are there no jobs at the resort, but it doesn’t even boost other parts of the economy.
Despite fertile ground, Albanian agriculture is struggling. It needs government subsidies to get
back in order. But for now, most food is imported. New resorts are not buying local produce, because
the local produce doesn’t exist.

A parasailer flew overhead. I asked Aulon how much the coastline had changed in recent years, and he
shook his head and lit up his cigar again as we waited to maneuver around a coach full of tourists.

“It has been subject to increasingly aggressive change. When I was younger, it was sad for me to
witness. I was consoled because Vlore was not the center, but then they started attacking here
too.” We passed a beach club selling Aperol and private sunbeds. “What will it be? Nothing,”
he mused. “Just cafés and bars.” He pointed out a tree trunk at the edge of a construction
site. “There used to be three eucalyptus there, but the hotel owner cut them down because they
were obstructing his view.”

We arrived at Orikum and sat down for a caffè freddo at a café overlooking the sea.

“We have been told that tourism is the magic wand,” Aulon said, as ABBA’s “Gimme! Gimme!
Gimme!” played out of speakers over the heads of a Germany family wrapped in towels at the next
table, “that it will cure us and make us rich. But it will not if you don’t produce your own
food. Tourism should not be the main column of the economy. It should complement.”

[A few people on a rocky beach near a dilapidated small cement structure.]
[A few people on a rocky beach near a dilapidated small cement structure.] 
It has been possible for tourists to visit the island of Sazan only since 2015, and no overnight
stays are permitted. The island has a long and diverse military history. Italy had control of it
during World War I, and then it was passed back to Albania. The Soviets established a military base
there after World War II but were booted off in 1961 because Nikita Khrushchev, then the premier of
the Soviet Union, denounced Josef Stalin, which met with the disapproval of Hoxha, the Communist who
led Albania for most of the 20th century. From then on, Hoxha took complete control of the island,
building a settlement, banning foreigners, and limiting access even for Albanians—other than those
who had proved their loyalty to his regime. At its peak, 4,000 soldiers and their families lived on
the island. Sazan appealed to the infamously paranoid Hoxha as a vantage point from which he and his
associates could look out for any invaders who might come sailing over the Mediterranean to
interrupt his rule. Now there is a much depleted Albanian, and Italian, military presence on the
island. According to some reports, it houses just two soldiers.

This is the supposedly pristine island that Ivanka had hiked up barefoot. Now it was my turn.

Before I got on my boat, I got to talking to Regina. She was checking people in on the pier for a
separate boat tour to Sazan on a replica galleon that advertises the opportunity to “be a pirate
for a day.” “Maybe this will be the last year we visit,” she said of her countrymen generally.
“But we hope not.” She is, “of course,” against the developments. “It will not be positive
for the country. They will not buy from the locals, these luxury visitors, and we are not going to
profit from this tourism.” She corrected herself: “They are not tourists. They are elites.”

On my boat, a packed, three-deck pleasure cruise otherwise populated by swimsuit-clad tourists and
screaming infants, the story was much the same. I spoke to one of the boat staff, Alessio, after he
had finished handing round slices of watermelon to the clientele. He was 18 and spending his summer
working in order to pay for his training to become a doctor. “We pray that they don’t give it
away,” he said as we leaned over the boat’s side and looked out at the island over the waves.

There were other stops before we got to Sazan: a beach on the Karaburun Peninsula, a look at a
beloved local cave. I ended up in the orbit of Corrie, a woman in her 50s from Manchester, England,
who offered me some rum and Coke that she’d smuggled on board to avoid paying boat bar prices.
She’d been traveling all over the Balkans, to untouched places that seem right on the verge of
being truly developed for tourism. “It feels like you’re seeing the end of something,” she
said. “Maybe they need to look at the Costa del Whatsit and see what the cost is of tourism,
because you can’t undo it once it’s done.”

At the height of the day’s heat, we approached Sazan. Only pine trees and rock faces are visible
as you approach it by boat. It’s big, too, nearly 10 miles long, and peaky, with some squat
concrete buildings up at the crest of one of the hills, and a single telegraph pole. Other tour
boats skate around the limestone coast fringed with wind-blasted greenery. There are large fragments
of salt-eaten machinery littering the shore, relics of the island’s martial heyday.

There are parts of the island you’re not allowed to photograph, “secure zones” consisting of
dilapidated military buildings topped with ragged, sun-bleached Albanian flags. I took a walking
tour with a handful of tourists from the boat and a guide, Gleni, up to the old Communist-era
village. Along the rugged path (which, incidentally, you’d be insane to walk barefoot), little
mushroom-shaped domes are visible, half-buried in the shrubs and blackberry bushes. These are
bunkers, of which there are 3,600 on the island. Each bunker leads into an extensive tunnel network
beneath the rocks that was built to protect the island in case of attack. There’s no electricity
grid or potable water. All that will be down to the Albanian state to provide to make the
Trump-Kushner development viable.

“From here, now, we have to stay on the path,” Gleni announced to us a few minutes into our walk
up the hill, “because there are mines around.” Yes, Sazan is covered in unexploded land mines, a
feature that, like the waterlessness and lack of electricity, doesn’t scream “luxury tourist
development.”

I asked Gleni what he thought of the planned development. He’s studying for a degree in tourism at
the University of Vlore. On our way up here, we had passed graffiti flamingos on the sides of
bunkers and on the path itself, but he had made no reference to them in his spiel about the
island’s history. He looked grave. “I’m against it. I’ve been in protests in Tirana, because
we are not against tourism or development, but we are against selling the land and taking parts of
protected zones, giving it to a businessman, or whatever you would call them.”

On our way back down, an Australian tourist strayed from the path toward a tunnel entrance. Gleni
whipped toward him: “Come back, come back,” he said. “You’re safe, but not that much.”

For people like Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump to have their pied-à-terre in the Mediterranean, and
more importantly make a shedload of cash out of it, who has to lose? All land that tourist
development happens on belongs, in some way, to someone: the state, Indigenous people, or
individuals. In the last part of my time in Albania, I met some of the people who are the true
owners of the plot of land that was now destined to become part of the Kushner-Trump development.

Bruna Subashi, an energetic woman in her 40s, asked to convene in a luridly pink dessert parlor on
Vlore’s waterfront called Big Scoop. Bruna is an academic in the field of nursing, and her husband
comes from Zvernec. She was late to meet me because she had stopped to sign a petition about
pollution on Vlore’s beaches. “Every day we have to sign a petition to save our country, save
the nature, save the city,” she sighed as we sat down. She has taken it upon herself to protest
loudly and widely against the Vjosa Narta project. “I am so tired!” she said, laughing with the
near-hysteria of someone genuinely exhausted.

Bruna’s need to protest comes partly from her connection to the place: Her mother-in-law is 88,
has been in Zvernec her whole life, and has spent the past 20 years battling to prove that the land
on the Zvernec peninsula belongs to her and her fellow villagers. Her people have lived on this land
since the fifth century. Her home in Zvernec village seems safe, but seeing what’s happened on the
peninsula, she now worries about whether that will be taken away too. She is, according to Bruna,
also not sleeping well anymore.

The next day, Bruna and her husband took me to meet her, and the other owners of the property that
the state has commandeered to sell to Kushner and Trump.It happened to be the day when elderly
people—and most of Zvernec’s 200-odd residents are elderly people—collected their pensions of
100 euros a month, in cash, from a municipality employee installed at a table in the
café-slash-shop-slash-bar at the center of the village. “It’s only enough for their
medicines,” Bruna said. Life here is largely supported by children and grandchildren who have
moved abroad seeking work, often construction for the men and cleaning for the women, and can send a
little money back home.

At least one person in Zvernec has a sense of humor about the proposed development. A local
restaurant has been renamed “Ivanka Seafood” in recent months, although when I went in there to
find out exactly why, all I found was the chef, who knew nothing about it, and a large portrait of
Kate Winslet as Rose in _Titanic_ on the wall. In general, though, the mood is dark. None of the
residents wanted to give me their names, though Bruna said identifying them separately wouldn’t
matter. “All the inhabitants have the same problems, the same voice, they suffer the same.” And
they did want to talk. The owner of the shop, a woman nearing retirement age herself, told me about
her feelings on the development: “We are afraid that one day they can take our homes too. We want
to develop our village with the help of our own kids,” she said. “They work abroad, and all the
finances they gather there, they could invest here.”

Suddenly, she began to cry. “People live alone here,” she said. “Their kids are all abroad,
and old people die in their home, and nobody notices them. Sometimes they are dead for a week.”

Another woman began to console her, and a third woman raised her voice in anger. “We are obligated
to save our land because this is our heritage from our ancestors,” she said, gesticulating, “and
we want to inherit the land for other generations. We are pro-tourism, but not tourism by thieves
who grab our land without permission and without compensation and without information.”

They thanked me for being there and said they wished more Albanian journalists would come and talk
to them. The Albanian media, they said, is very cozy with Rama. “This is the last way to protect
our rights,” one woman said. “The inhabitants of Zvernec have a message for Rama,” she added,
standing up a little taller. “We are not guests here. We are the owners of the land.”

“But Rama knows this,” Bruna added quietly. “This is not news.”

It has now been six weeks since I left Albania. Every single day since, the protests have continued.
It seems the loudest message of all that Albanians have for Rama is: We are not giving up. If Ivanka
Trump and Jared Kushner want their paradise island, they’re going to have to go through an entire
nation to get it.
