

====================================================================================================

He Was the Most Acclaimed Novelist of His Generation. He Won the Nobel. He Was Worse Than Anyone Knows.

====================================================================================================

In the summer of 1958, the novelist Saul Bellow and his second wife, Sondra, were living in a
crumbling mansion in Tivoli, New York. They had purchased the house because it was conveniently
close to Bard College, where Bellow taught a literature class, but it had turned out to be badly in
need of repair. It came with 14 large rooms on three floors, including a space in the basement for a
dining area, which they furnished with a heavy mahogany table.

One evening in June, Bellow and his wife, whom he called Sasha, sat down together for dinner. Adam,
their 16-month-old son, was asleep upstairs. The table was set with a vase of peonies from the
garden, along with a tureen of stew and a whole watermelon. Before the meal was over, the table
would be overturned, the dishes and a glass percolator shattered on the stone floor, the melon
bursting open into a flood of black seeds. Rushing to get Adam, Sasha would escape in her car to the
house of their neighbor, Bellow’s friend Jack Ludwig, with whom she was having an affair.

It was the turning point in the disintegration of their marriage, which ended in divorce two years
later. Notably, however, the incident was omitted entirely from the most visible product of their
married life, Bellow’s famed novel _Herzog_. After its publication in 1964, the book became a
runaway success, dominating the bestseller lists for six months, receiving the National Book Award,
and making its author wealthy and famous at last at 49. For the rest of his life, Bellow’s
position at the peak of American letters would be unchallenged, culminating a decade later in the
Nobel Prize. Shortly before his death in 2005, Martin Amis praised him as “the greatest American
author ever.” (When he died that April, Slate alone ran at least three articles on his legacy,
including a 6,000-word remembrance with contributions from 20 novelists and critics.)

_Herzog_ was also what the critic Louis Menand called “a revenge novel,” with parallels to
Bellow’s marriage that were obvious even at the time. Its protagonist, Moses E. Herzog, is a
philosophy professor whose life is upended when his wife, Madeleine, asks for a divorce. After they
separate, Herzog learns that Madeleine has been sleeping with his closest friend, Valentine
Gersbach. Herzog eloquently describes his suffering in unsent letters to living politicians and dead
philosophers, but he finds that his education has done nothing to prepare him for his private
humiliations.

When the novel appeared, the consensus was that it was blatantly autobiographical. Madeleine was a
distorted picture of Sasha—who carried on an illicit relationship with Ludwig, Gersbach’s
minimally disguised counterpart—and the book derived much of its power from what seemed like
Bellow’s confrontation with his own pain. The poet John Berryman wrote to Bellow, “Nobody has
ever sat down and wallowed to this extent in his own life, _with_ full art.”

[A professional author headshot of Saul Bellow.]
[A professional author headshot of Saul Bellow.] Bettman/Getty Images
As it turned out, Bellow would never again grapple with his demons as openly as in _Herzog_, which
is widely regarded as his masterwork. Yet even readers unfamiliar with its scandalous backstory
might be troubled by its misogynistic depiction of the protagonist’s wife, who is repeatedly
described as a psychopath. Madeleine is never granted a moment of kindness or happiness, and her
abuse of Herzog in the published version seems totally unmotivated.

While it doesn’t require a great leap of the imagination to suspect that Bellow shaped the novel
to depict himself in a favorable light, for decades, it was the only version of the story that
readers were likely to see. More recently, however, Bellow’s biographers have shown that _Herzog_
left out a key fact about the author’s marriage that changes the picture entirely: He was
repeatedly physically violent against Sasha, who suffered serious injuries at his hands. When filled
out by other sources—the full range of which have never been presented by any critic or biographer
until now—the story that emerges is far more plausible, and more disturbing, than the one in
Bellow’s novel.

What follows here is a triangulation between multiple independent versions of events, with highly
variable but intersecting reliability, arranged together for the first time. (One crucial source is
a deservedly forgotten novel with obvious parallels to _Herzog_, written by Ludwig, the third member
of the love triangle, which turned out to be both embarrassing and revealing.) Searching for the
truth about Bellow requires looking for the recurrence of tiny details—like the watermelon on the
table—that allow these accounts to be spliced together, the way a documentary cuts between
original footage and dramatizations with actors on a studio set, revealing damning similarities as
well as differences that are often equally telling.

In the process of assembling this story, I was reminded of more recent instances of alleged domestic
violence that have been litigated in public, notably the defamation suit filed by Johnny Depp
against Amber Heard. Neither Heard nor Sasha was a perfect victim. Both were vulnerable to
allegations of “mutual abuse,” which ignored the true balances of power in their marriages, and
the narrative in both cases was shaped by a famous man who retaliated with all the resources at his
disposal.

_Herzog_ will always have vastly more readers than Sasha’s story, but my hope is that this
investigation will go partway toward correcting the historical record. A writer of Bellow’s
stature, who towers over the American canon and endures in classrooms and beyond, demands this kind
of scrutiny. Our understanding of the Bellow who died in 2005 is incomplete, and this reckoning is
long overdue, especially for those who believe—like I do—that _Herzog_ is still worth reading.

Many of the accusations against Bellow can best be understood as part of a larger cycle of violence.
Bellow remembered his father, Abraham, as a “tyrannical” man who beat all his sons. In the
novella _A Theft_, Bellow’s narrator reflects wryly on a televised report about child abuse:
“Most of what they showed was normal punishment in my time.” Bellow’s third son, Daniel, who
told the biographer Zachary Leader that his father hit him “maybe three or four times,” wrote to
the agent Andrew Wylie, “What I took for neglect and cruelty I now recognize as the standard
Russian Jewish child rearing method, seldom seen in this country anymore.”

While Saul exhibited some degree of this behavior toward his high school girlfriend Eleanor
Fox—“I was afraid of the guy,” Fox later told James Atlas, Bellow’s first biographer—there
isn’t any evidence that he physically harmed his first wife, Anita Goshkin, who merely had to live
with what Atlas describes as “Bellow’s self-absorption, his infidelities, and the outbursts of
bristling hostility that visitors observed.” All sources agree that many women found Bellow
attractive, and he indulged in numerous affairs.

By the fall of 1952, his marriage to Anita, with whom he had a son, was effectively over. One day,
he placed a call to the literary magazine Partisan Review, where the telephone was answered by a
21-year-old receptionist named Sondra Tschacbasov. Sasha, as she was known to her friends, was a
recent Bennington graduate, and Bellow reflexively flirted with her over the phone: “I don’t
recognize your voice—you must be someone new,” he said. After asking for her name, Bellow
professed to be “enchanted” by its Russian origins, declaring that he was coming over to meet
her.

On arriving at the office, Bellow found a strikingly beautiful young woman with dark bangs, pale
skin, and blue eyes. As he began to pursue her, he delighted in showing off her looks, but he was
less interested in her emotions. From the age of 12, Sasha had been sexually abused by her father,
the painter Nahum Tschacbasov, and she was devastated when Bellow implied that she had made it all
up. “He really shocked me one day when he lashed out, saying that he wasn’t sure he entirely
believed any of it,” Sasha later recalled. His doubts are reflected in _Herzog_, in which
Madeleine reveals that she was abused as a girl. Herzog responds that “many people” have these
experiences: “Can’t base a whole life on that. It doesn’t mean that much.”

In the meantime, Bellow’s star was rising. _The Adventures of Augie March_ became his most
acclaimed novel to date, but sales were modest, and he accepted a teaching position at Bard. His
fellow faculty members included Jack Ludwig, a colorful Canadian with a visible limp caused by gout.
(His counterpart in _Herzog_ has a wooden leg.) Ludwig promptly attached himself to Bellow—he
flattered and openly imitated him—and grew friendly with Sasha as well.

During the fall of 1955, Bellow lived in Reno for three months to obtain a divorce from Anita,
joking that he agreed to marry Sasha to “get into her pants.” At their small wedding, the four
guests included Ludwig and his wife, who eventually settled in the same area of the Hudson Valley as
Bellow and Sasha. When the Bellows moved into their ramshackle house in Tivoli, Sasha was five
months pregnant. Their son, Adam, was born on Feb.
19, 1957.

HIS WEAKNESS WITH WOMEN ON THE PAGE WAS INSEPARABLE FROM HIS RELUCTANCE TO EMPATHIZE WITH THEM IN
HIS PERSONALLIFE.
While Bellow worked on his novel _Henderson the Rain King_, cracks began to appear in his and
Sasha’s marriage, and a year later, it erupted into violence. Figuring out what truly happened
calls for combining multiple sources. Highest in credibility are Bellow’s and Sasha’s letters,
although we need to account for each correspondent’s tendency to emphasize details that support
his or her version of events. Another crucial document is Sasha’s unpublished memoir, _What’s in
a Name?_, which she gave to Leader before her death.

Next on the list are Bellow’s fictionalized accounts in both the published text of _Herzog_ and
his earlier drafts, never examined before in this light, which I reviewed in his papers at the
University of Chicago. As a source of information, Bellow’s fiction needs to be used with caution,
but his biographers have all drawn on it extensively. Bellow is the most autobiographical of
authors, with portraits of real people and events incorporated virtually intact into his stories.

One last source is the most tantalizing of all. In 1968, Jack Ludwig published the awful
autobiographical novel _Above Ground_, a funhouse-mirror version of _Herzog_ that offers his own
account of Bellow and Sasha’s relationship. Ludwig’s surrogate is named Joshua—as opposed to
Bellow’s Moses—and lives near a sculptor, Louie, and his wife, Mavra. Josh finds himself drawn
into their lives, even as his wife, Maggie, warns him to keep his distance: “They kick the shit
out of each other the way other people play a hand of gin rummy.”

As evidence, _Above Ground_ is undoubtedly problematic, and its episodes of violence between Louie
and Mavra are secondhand versions, at best, of what Bellow or Sasha told Ludwig. But if anything,
the author’s clumsiness makes his methods more transparent. Although Ludwig imitates Bellow in his
use of personal details, he lacks his friend’s gift of invention. Where his account overlaps with
the others, he provides enough corroboration to inform the overall picture. This article is the
first time that Ludwig’s novel has been used to fill in the gaps between the lines of _Herzog_,
which is clearly what he wanted all along.

In her correspondence, Sasha referred to three specific instances of domestic abuse. On Sept. 24,
1962, she wrote to Bellow, “There are a number of people around here and in Minnesota who remember
your threats to beat me up, and others who remember that you did, in fact, do so on two occasions
during our marriage.” Three weeks later, Sasha told Bellow in another letter, “You somehow have
had to justify these now three separate scenes of your beating or attacking me, with some physical
provocation on my part which simply did not occur.”

These three events—two during their marriage, once after their divorce—can be identified and
dated precisely. Bellow’s first major biographer, Atlas, recounted this abusive behavior only in
passing in _Bellow: A Biography_, which was published during its subject’s lifetime, but the first
volume of Leader’s exhaustive _The Life of Saul Bellow_ went into much greater detail. When that
book appeared in 2015, however, two years before #MeToo, its description of Bellow’s violence
against Sasha was barely discussed by reviewers, when it was mentioned at all.

[The cover of Herzog is an abstract drawing, mostly bright blue.]
[The cover of Herzog is an abstract drawing, mostly bright blue.] First Edition/Viking Press
According to Sasha’s letters, Bellow assaulted her for the first time in the spring of 1958.
Although the circumstances of this incident are less clear than for the episodes that followed, its
origins can be traced back to Bellow’s dissatisfaction with Sasha’s housekeeping. In _Herzog_,
his fictional surrogate complains of “eggshells, chop bones, tin cans under the table, under the
sofa,” which provoke him to disproportionate outbursts of anger: “It was always something
trivial that set him off—a bounced check, a chicken that had rotted in the icebox, a new shirt
torn up for rags. Gradually his feelings became very fierce.”

Sasha describes these scenes more explicitly in her memoir. “He was either distant or lashing out
at me,” she remembered. “I irritated him mightily, he lost his temper over the house, grabbing
me by the shoulder like an unruly child, marching me to the scene of my latest failing (the dust in
front of the door, the pot I forgot to clean, the socks in the sink).” Leader, the only biographer
to use her memoir as a source, briefly alludes to the consequences: “On occasion, Sasha claims,
the lashing out was physical, though he was ‘always contrite afterwards.’ ”

In her letter to Bellow dated Oct. 18, 1962, Sasha mentions two incidents of violence during their
marriage, the earlier of which seems to belong here: “You report that I ‘went for a knife.’ As
you know, I was reaching for the telephone to call for help since we had been quarreling violently.
There was no knife about.” Sasha never reveals whom she was calling, but it was almost certainly
the Ludwigs.

A second later, the telephone rings in the pages of _Above Ground_. In Ludwig’s novel, Josh
receives a call from Mavra, asking him to come over. After he hangs up, Maggie, his wife, warns him
not to get involved, but Josh insists: “Mag, he may be killing her.” Driving to the house, Josh
finds Louie standing out front, already launching into an explanation. “We had a physical
struggle. Nothing. She clawed me. To calm her I threw her to the floor a little in self-defense.”
As Josh heads inside, Louie adds, “She’ll say I beat her up. Maybe I gave her a little nudge
with my shoe when she fell on the floor—helped her collect herself.”

In the hall, Josh opens the door leading to the basement kitchen, where he sees Mavra giving the
baby a bottle. After Mavra accuses her husband of hurting her, Louie shoots back, “I barely tapped
you.” Claiming that he hit her with his hat—a detail that reappears in Bellow’s actions
elsewhere—she shows Josh the visible signs of abuse: “Mavra stood up, raised her sweater; three
red fingerwelts stood out on her ribs.” She asks to leave, saying that she is afraid of her
husband, who lifts his hat as a threat. As Josh pushes them apart, he notices that Mavra’s eyes
are full of tears. At that point, the scene abruptly ends.

Shortly after this incident, in the real world, Ludwig fell in love with Sasha, whom he informed of
Bellow’s infidelities. According to Sasha’s unpublished memoir, they became closer, and in May,
Ludwig kissed her. Sasha was surprised, but she reciprocated his affections. In turn, Ludwig
revealed more about Bellow’s affairs with a student at Bard and a Japanese woman in New York, both
of whom would later be fictionalized in _Herzog_.

The second known act of assault—the one that began in the basement dining room in
Tivoli—occurred in June, shortly after Sasha began her clandestine relationship with Ludwig.
According to her memoir, when Sasha reminded Bellow of a $5,000 loan that they had received from her
mother, he shouted back, “That was no loan. She gave us that money.” Sasha, who felt that her
mother had given them “everything she had,” was shocked. “We were in the dining room, he
pounded on the table, the dishes rattled and slid around. ‘I won’t be made a fool of by the two
of you!’ he roared, and in that moment I saw him through a red haze of fury and, in an adrenalin
surge, lifted the table at my end and flung it at him.”

Although Bellow cut this incident from the final text of _Herzog_, two versions survive in
manuscript form. One closely follows Sasha’s account, with Herzog’s wife upending the table,
smashing the watermelon and glass percolator on the floor. Another draft presents the wife’s
actions as a direct physical attack. Herzog reflects that his psychologist “said my violence
bullied people”—a significant reference in itself—“but come to think of it he didn’t say
what was the object of her smashing of china, clawing books, flinging a tureen of stew and a whole
watermelon at my head.”

The scene also appears in a crudely fictionalized form in _Above Ground_. In Ludwig’s telling,
Louie grabs at Mavra’s shoulder, tearing her blouse as she pulls away: “She whirled to shake him
off, bumped his table, his bread and board, backdrop, stage set. One lift, so easy, everything
sliding, flipped, scattered over the floor—silver flowers glass soup tureen splattering red
watermelon.” Despite the embarrassingly bad writing, its parallels with the unpublished drafts of
_Herzog_—the tureen, the watermelon—suggest that it was based on information that Ludwig heard
from one or both participants.

What happened next—in real life and in fiction—is less clear. Herzog confesses in one draft that
he lashed out violently after his wife upset the table, admitting, “I gave her a powerful kick in
the slats,” or ribs. In another version, Herzog says, “I did hit her in the country. She
overturned the dining room table.” This all strongly implies that Bellow kicked or hit Sasha
during the argument. As will soon become obvious, Bellow was more likely to remove, rather than add,
material that was unflattering to his fictional alter ego.

“WHEN SAUL WOULD ENTER THE ENDGAME OF A MARRIAGE, HE WOULD START BUILDING A CASE THAT THE WIFE
WASCRAZY.” 
— Saul Bellow’s son Adam 
In another manuscript variant, Herzog grabs at his wife’s hair as she attempts to leave the house
with their child. This detail also appears in _Above Ground_, which was written without any
knowledge of the material in Bellow’s drafts: “She tried to get away. His hand tightened. She
heard her hair tearing at the scalp, heard it then felt it.” In Ludwig’s version, the Bellow
character then strikes his wife’s neck, draws back his foot as if to kick her, and cuts her cheek
with his key ring.

Some of these details may be fictional. Sasha mentions no violence at this point in her memoir,
writing, “I ran upstairs, hoisted Adam and grabbed the car keys, downstairs in a flash. I jumped
in the car. He stood in the driveway, daring me. ‘Get out of the way, Saul, now, or I’ll run you
over,’ I shrieked, and started up the car—he jumped away, and I went to the Ludwigs.” Bellow
echoes Sasha’s account in his earlier drafts of the novel, as Herzog tries to stop his wife by
standing in the road. Seeing murder in her eyes, he dives out of the way as she drives off.

In her Oct. 18, 1962, letter to Bellow, Sasha described a more violent conclusion to the scene,
which doesn’t appear in her memoir. “You have often told a story of how I tried to run you down
with the car in Tivoli. As you know perfectly well, I was trying to leave, with Adam in the car and
you deliberately put yourself in my path knowing, of course, that I would not run you down, but
stop. Unfortunately I did stop, for as you know, you dragged me from the car by my hair across the
lawn, kicked me and whipped me with your cap.”

The only source for what happened immediately afterward is _Above Ground_, in which an injured Mavra
arrives at Josh’s house: “Her cheek was bleeding, one eye was bruised red.” As his wife takes
the baby, Josh helps her out of the car, noticing that the hand at Mavra’s ear is covered in
blood. Mavra says to him despairingly, “My hair—Josh, both his hands were full.”

As she speaks, the phone at the house rings. On the other end is the Bellow character, who is ready
with his own take on their “little fracas”: “We’re both strained. You know how it is with
husbands and wives, pal? I had to tap her a couple of times. Pulled the kitchen knife on me. Tried
to run me down with the car—violent. Poor kid. There’s a history of seizures in their blood.”

Back in Bellow’s manuscripts, Ludwig’s fictional counterpart goes to Herzog’s house to inform
him that his wife will be staying in town. He also asks if Herzog tried to tear her hair out. Given
its recurrence in three independent accounts, it seems very likely that Bellow did pull Sasha by the
hair that day, either in the house or after yanking her out of the car.

Bellow later referred to this incident as their “blowup,” writing to the author Keith Botsford,
“We had an explosion and it blew everything to bits except the essentials.” Leaving with her son
for New York, Sasha considered divorcing Bellow, but she returned when he began teaching at the
University of Minnesota. One of his conditions for accepting the position was that another job be
found there for Ludwig, who was still concealing his affair with Sasha.

[A notebook open to handwritten pages.]
[A notebook open to handwritten pages.] Saul Bellow’s handwritten drafts of his book _The
Adventures of Augie March_, part of his archives on display inside the University of Chicago’s
Regenstein Library exhibit, May 7, 2019.  Abel Uribe/Chicago Tribune/Tribune News Service/Getty
Images
Sasha also told Bellow to undergo therapy. He ended up seeing a psychologist who, rather
questionably, became Sasha’s therapist as well. Bellow wrote to a friend, “Sondra has a nervous
disorder, in itself not too serious. It doesn’t affect her health but it does account for our
martial disorders to a considerable extent.” He told his editor that Sasha had “a small lesion
of the temporal lobe” that was responsible for her behavior: “She may have to take drugs to
control it. Meanwhile she’s having treatment from my doctor. He says it’s not a dangerous
illness but needs to be understood and watched.”

In the meantime, Sasha was still sleeping with both Bellow and Ludwig. After she became pregnant,
she had no way of knowing who the father was. (She eventually had an abortion.) Finally, in the fall
of 1959, Sasha asked Bellow for a divorce. Bellow was struck by her “icy control,” which he
fictionalized in one of the most famous scenes in _Herzog_. Sasha provided a somewhat different
account of the conversation, claiming that Bellow agreed that they were no longer happy together,
only to ask plaintively, “But who’ll cook for me?”

Afterward, Sasha allowed him to see Adam just once a week, saying that she would call the police if
he tried to come to the house. Bellow, for his part, was already disseminating his version of
events, writing to Botsford, “It’s she who’s doing this, cutting me off, taking away Adam. I
can’t say for what failures of mine. Not the ordinary ones like money, sex, rivals or any of that.
But maybe _because_ there have been no such failures.” In a letter to his editor, Bellow referred
to his wife’s “insect heart,” and he concluded, “But really I love her too much and
understand her too well to feel the murderous hatred that would help me.”

Sasha didn’t ask for any alimony, only child support, and the divorce was finalized in June 1960.
Writing to Sasha’s lawyer, Bellow said, “I tried to be a husband to that poor castrating
girl—an odd desire, but I had it.”

“MY ‘VIOLENCE’ IS PROBABLY ANOTHER ONE OF YOUR HALLUCINATIONS.” 
— Saul Bellow, in a letter to his wife 
Incredibly, Bellow still didn’t know about Sasha’s affair with Ludwig. In the fall, however, one
of her acquaintances informed Bellow for the first time that Sasha had been sleeping with the man he
had seen as one of his closest friends.

Bellow reacted immediately with threats, speaking wildly of obtaining a gun and telling Ralph Ross,
the head of the humanities program at the University of Minnesota, “I’m going to catch that
son-of-a-bitch Ludwig and beat him to a pulp.”

In fact, no confrontation, violent or otherwise, occurred between Ludwig and Bellow. Instead, he
simply attacked Sasha one last time.

On Aug. 31, 1962, more than two years after the divorce, Sasha and Adam were visiting Ann Berryman,
the ex-wife of Bellow’s friend John, in Peekskill, New York. When Bellow came to pick up Adam for
the weekend, Sasha could tell that he was prepared for a fight. She wrote in her memoir:

> He was spoiling for it, I could see his tense lip and twitch that always telegraphed a simmering
> rage. But I was reckless and confronted him about the lateness of the checks, and said it was a
> problem now, since I was running out of money. He made some remark, about how the money was for
> Adam not for me. I brought up the money he never paid my mother and should give to me, now that
> she was dead. He countered with something nasty about not supporting my lover, so I slapped him
> and he grabbed me by the pony tail and swung me around punching me with his other hand. I was
> bruised for a week and took out a restraining order. I knew that I had really provoked him, but
> the extraordinary violence was bubbling inside him, barely controlled, waiting for a trigger.

This account dates from years after the fact, but many of the same details appear in a letter that
Sasha wrote to her lawyer on Sept. 10, 1962. She made no mention of a slap, writing emphatically,
“I did not provoke this attack, nor did I make any physical gesture towards him which could even
remotely [be] mistaken for an attack.” Saying that she had been saved only by Ann Berryman’s
intervention, Sasha provided a graphic list of her injuries: “Severe bone bruises behind one ear,
cuts on my left temple and left eyelid, and a bad bruise on my left breast. My scalp is a mess of
lumps and bruises.”

A few weeks after the incident, Sasha wrote to Bellow that the police—who had been given his photo
“in the interests of my personal safety”—would be called if she ever saw him near her
apartment. She also brought up the “two occasions” on which he beat her while they were married.
On Sept. 30, Bellow responded with his own account of what happened:

> The violence of that occasion was provoked by you, perhaps deliberately. You tore my clothing,
> bruised me, and had to be restrained by Ann Berryman from continuing your attack. … Your
> pugnacity is a matter of record. Even before the divorce you struck me with your fists. You tried
> to run me down with the car. On the day when you claim to have been assaulted, I came home with
> bruises. You have been known to do things you could not remember later. My “violence” is
> probably another one of your hallucinations.

Bellow’s last line was close to the textbook definition of gaslighting. He also contradicted
himself, defending his behavior while simultaneously implying that it had all been in her
imagination.

In her letter of Oct. 18, Sasha turned this “hallucination” argument back on Bellow. During his
earlier violent episodes, she wrote, he had imagined that she was going for a knife or trying to run
him down: “You cannot take a thought that flashes, perhaps in your own mind, like, ‘I wonder if
she will stop the car’ or, ‘Would she like to kill me’ and translate that into something that
actually happened. These things did _not_ happen. What is true is that I was in a car and trying to
leave; that I was reaching, but for a phone; that I did not provoke or attack _you_ in Peekskill,
but that you were carrying out a threat you made in Minneapolis.”

It was the last known instance of violence in their relationship, but Bellow no longer needed to
resort to the blunt instrument of assault. He was already preparing a more subtle revenge in
_Herzog_, which he was composing with two distinct audiences in mind. As the literary bestseller
that had long eluded him, it would find a huge mainstream readership, but it would also be read
carefully by the people in his life. For them, he wanted the novel to convey a specific message. As
Bellow’s son Adam later said to Leader, “When Saul would enter the endgame of a marriage, he
would start building a case that the wife was crazy.”

On Jan. 22, 1960, Bellow had written to his editor with an update on his latest project: “The
story _is_ about Sondra, and it may be a trial run, who knows?” A novel inspired by the end of the
Bellows’ marriage necessarily had to include Ludwig, who was incorporated almost unchanged into
the book. Bellow made no secret of the fact that he viewed _Herzog_ as an act of revenge, telling a
former student, “I’m going to stick him into my new novel. By the time I’m through with him,
he’ll be laughed right out of the literature business.”

When it came to depicting Bellow and Sasha, however, the originals had to be revised more
thoroughly. On encountering the critic Wayne Booth in Hyde Park, Bellow said lightly that he was
“going through the manuscript and weeding out parts of myself that I don’t like.” His
protagonists always tended to be idealized versions of himself, but Herzog, for once, had to be
smaller than Bellow, a victim who grew more blameless with every revision, even if it undermined the
logic of the narrative.

IN THE DRAFTS, HERZOG ENGAGES IN EVEN DARKER DAYDREAMS—KICKING HIS WIFE, SLASHING HER FACE,
DISMEMBERING HER—THAT WERE CUT FROM THE FINISHEDTEXT.
Bellow’s papers reveal that he carefully pruned away references to Herzog’s infidelities, which
are only fleetingly addressed in the final version. In the published text, Madeleine’s aunt scolds
him, “You’ve been reckless about women.” Alluding to his sexual problems, Herzog implicitly
concedes that he was unfaithful: “There was some trouble for a while. But not in the last two
years. And hardly ever with other women.” Bellow cautiously incorporates two of these
relationships into the book, but he moves them conspicuously outside the timeline of Herzog’s
marriage.

Even more significant is the minimization of the main character’s violence, which in the finished
book is confined to fantasy, although traces of it remain. Madeleine’s aunt tells him, “She says
you were a dictator, a regular tyrant. You bullied her.” Another character alludes to his wife’s
description of his “intolerable temper which often frightened her.”

These threads are left mysteriously hanging in a novel that vigorously dramatizes every other aspect
of Herzog’s life. In earlier drafts, however, they were crucial. Bellow referred in his notes to
Herzog’s fits of rage over money, which cause him to shout, bully his wife, and pound the table.
In the revision, he cut all mentions of Herzog’s hitting or kicking Madeleine, as well as a
telling remark from his psychologist: “Obviously she’s afraid of you. She thinks you may murder
her.”

The omission of this material drastically affects how the reader understands Madeleine’s actions.
In the final text, Herzog laments, “Suddenly, because Madeleine decided that she wanted
out—suddenly, I was a mad dog. The police were warned about me and there was talk of committing me
to an institution.” According to Bellow’s biographers, in real life, Sasha had more than enough
reason to be concerned for her safety. In the novel, Madeleine’s fears seem inexplicable.

Bellow also scaled back Herzog’s violent fantasies. In the published novel, Herzog admits that he
feels capable of murdering the guilty couple, and he engages in an extended reverie: “Herzog …
pictured what might have happened if instead of listening so intensely and thoughtfully he had hit
Madeleine in the face. What if he had knocked her down, clutched her hair, dragged her screaming and
fighting around the room, flogged her until her buttocks bled. What if he had! He should have torn
her clothes, ripped off her necklace, brought his fists down on her head. He rejected this mental
violence, sighing. He was afraid he was really given in secret to this sort of brutality.” In the
drafts, Herzog engages in even darker daydreams—kicking his wife, slashing her face, dismembering
her—that were cut from the finished text.

By the final version, these murderous impulses are transferred almost entirely to Madeleine. “In
spirit she was his murderess,” Herzog asserts in one passage, claiming this justifies any revenge
he could take. In another section, he remembers “the terrifying menstrual ice of her rages, the
look of the murderess.” Yet Madeleine’s actions offer no reason for the reader to see her as
dangerous. Bellow, usually a master of vivid detail, is content to repeat the word _murderess_.

Notably, he cut the dining-table episode, perhaps because it was inconsistent with his portrait of
Madeleine as icy and calculating. Instead, he filled the book with vague allusions to mental
illness. In early drafts, the wife is called Juliana, which he changed to Madeleine, or Mady—the
_mad_ right there in her name, like the _hurt_ in “Herzog.” Without any evidence, Herzog says
that her behavior matches a checklist of the symptoms of paranoia, including “Homosexual
Inclinations” and “Hostile Projections,” and his psychologist agrees that she is delusional.

Even on the novel’s first publication, many critics noticed its imbalanced treatment of Madeleine.
In the New Republic, Bellow’s friend Irving Howe wrote, “The portrait is unjust, an utter libel,
but a classic of male retaliation. … One suspects Bellow of settling private scores.” Adam
Bellow later told the historian David Mikics, “It was impossible to recognize my mother in that
portrait.”

In 1968, Sasha wrote to Bellow that she had been humiliated by the book, but added, “I forgive you
_Herzog_, as I assumed you forgave me Jack.” Bellow fired back: “There is another book, isn’t
there? It is the product of two minds and two spirits, not one. … The letters of the heroine are
consciously superior in style, but the book is garbage.” (His false equivalence of _Herzog_ and
_Above Ground_ was ridiculous—the latter was dead on arrival—and Sasha denied collaborating with
Ludwig.)

Sasha was the only participant who was never allowed to tell her side, which was left to her
husband’s biographers. Atlas mentions the second instance of violence, which he incorrectly
divides into two separate incidents: “One particularly acrimonious scene ended with dinner flung
on the floor. Another time, Bellow claimed that Sondra had tried to run him over in the driveway.”
For the third, Atlas merely offers a quotation from his only interview with Sasha: “He beat me up
… [I was] bedridden for a week. Did I give him a slap? I did. But he retaliated violently—more
than once.” Atlas contents himself with a reference to Bellow’s “problematic marital
history” before simply moving on to the next marriage.

Bellow famously hated Atlas’ book, which was widely seen as a hatchet job. When the first volume
of Leader’s biography appeared 15 years later, many reviewers saw it as an attempt to correct
Atlas’ unflattering portrayal, but it describes these episodes in much greater detail, with a
forensic emphasis on giving equal weight to both sides. On the Peekskill incident, Leader notes,
“In the memoir, Sasha admits that she slapped Bellow and provoked the violence,” in contrast to
the letter in which she denied attacking him: “Here, too, there is room for equivocation, though
only just. A slap might not be thought to constitute an ‘attack.’ ” Pointing out the
contradictions in Bellow’s account, he writes, “Both parties were shading the truth.”

In justifying his inclusion of this material, Leader also cautions against using the novel as
evidence: “These accusations and counteraccusations are rehearsed here because they are part of
the life Bellow lived as he wrote _Herzog_,” Leader writes. “Real life is woven into fiction
almost immediately. To look to the novel for what really happened—who did the provoking, how much
violence there actually was, who lied or shaded the truth—or even what Bellow thought happened, is
futile.”

Yet elsewhere, Leader and Atlas constantly look to the fiction to illuminate the life. There is
hardly any point in writing a biography of Bellow without considering how events like this were
incorporated into his work. Apart from the drama of his marriages, his affairs, and his
transformation of real people into characters, his life was outwardly uneventful, which makes it all
the more surprising that none of the major reviews of Leader’s book seemed to take any notice of
Bellow’s abuse of Sasha.

This was partly an accident of timing. The first volume of _The Life of Saul Bellow_ appeared in
2015. When I asked Leader if he would have reworked certain sections in light of the shifting
conversation around abuse by powerful men, he replied, “The ‘conversation’ may have changed,
but I don’t think the literary biographer’s—or this literary biographer’s—approach should
change. In the case of violence in the relation between Sasha and Bellow, present all the relevant
information, suppress nothing, and show how what happened in real life, as much as it can be
determined, was transformed into fiction. Bellow wrote very close to life and the hurt and
unfairness that resulted from this transformation—for Sasha, for Adam, for others—must also be
fully presented, as it is in my book.”

In any biography of Bellow, Sasha will naturally be subordinated to her husband’s career. As
Leader notes of _Above Ground_, “Louie is a secondary character both in Mavra’s life and in the
novel, as Sasha claimed Bellow was in her life.” Sasha, who eventually left Ludwig as well, never
believed that she was defined by these relationships. “She and Bellow were only briefly married,
she reminded me several times,” Leader writes, “while her second marriage, according to her son
and others, was strong, happy, and lasted more than forty years, until her death in 2012.”

After their divorce, Sasha lingers in Bellow’s biographies mostly as a nagging presence in his
letters, constantly asking for financial support. Yet it remains possible to glimpse something more.
In his own memoir, _The Shadow in the Garden_, Atlas describes a tribute Adam gave at Sasha’s
funeral: “Divorced at twenty-nine, she had no money and couldn’t pay the phone bill; she
supported them by going into the city to write abstracts for an engineering journal. She designed
jewelry that she sold at the crafts fair on Columbus Avenue. She didn’t want her son to be
deprived of culture.”

For some readers, Sasha’s experience may seem less significant than Bellow’s literary
achievements. At the same time, Bellow’s inability to create convincing women, which is often
treated as a minor failing, should be relevant in assessing the writer routinely hailed as the
greatest novelist of his generation. His weakness with them on the page was inseparable from his
reluctance to empathize with them in his personal life. Despite his repeated infidelities, he
married five times, and the women tended to stay the same age as he grew older.

This side of his personality affected his fiction, and even Bellow knew that it was meaningful for
other reasons. Leader opens his biography with an account of Bellow, on his deathbed, asking the
scholar Eugene Goodheart, “Was I a man or was I a jerk?” In his introduction, Leader makes his
own views clear: “He was no jerk.” The question might seem impossible to resolve without more
definitive proof, ideally from an impartial third party.

In the second volume of his biography, Leader shares a story about Bellow and his longtime
girlfriend Maggie Staats, who was less than half his age. Bellow’s affair with Staats began while
he was married to his third wife, Susan Glassman, and continued after his divorce. In 1969, they
traveled to Spain, where they saw the editor Barley Alison and the literary agent Toby Eady. Leader
writes:

> [Bellow] was also “incredibly jealous” during the holiday, especially of Toby Eady, with whom
> he thought Maggie was flirting. One evening, after drinks on the terrace at Casa Alison, as the
> party headed inside for dinner, Bellow held Maggie back and slapped her so hard in the face “you
> could see the impact of his hand … all through the meal.” In recalling the incident over the
> telephone forty-five years later, Eady could barely contain himself. “I think he’s a complete
> shit,” he said. “The only man in my life who I have seen hit a woman.”

The imprint of Bellow’s hand on Staats’ face should resolve any doubts on the matter.

Six decades after its publication, _Herzog_ remains a great novel, and it can still speak urgently
to readers who feel lost in the world, even if its vision of reality is limited to one man’s inner
life. Whether or not it was worth the cost is another question. Bellow hinted at his own thoughts on
the subject to the actress Helen Garrie, who was romantically involved with him in the 1960s. Garrie
told Atlas that Bellow’s seductions were the acts of a “most insecure man,” and she never
forgot a remark that he casually made: “Women are the rails on which men run.”
