

====================================================================================================

‘You are living with a difficult person who is waiting to die’: my harrowing time as Patricia Highsmith’s assistant

====================================================================================================

I first read Patricia Highsmith’s novels in the autumn of 1994. I was 20 and living in a room
in her house in Tegna, Switzerland, that was plastered with bookshelves full of her first editions,
organised in chronological order. Pat was 73 and knew she was about to die; she had been, it was
rumoured, diagnosed with cancer or some other terminal disease. I was trapped in her world with her,
trembling. She had weeks left to live and had spent so much time writing about how to get away with
murder. I fantasised that she might try to kill me.

The story of how I ended up in that house begins a few months earlier, in Zurich, with me on a blue
tram, on my way to dinner at the house of Anna and Daniel Keel, a couple I’d grown friendly
with. Anna was a brilliant painter for whom I had been modelling since I was 17. Her studio smelled
like oil paint, instant coffee and the brine in which floated the mozzarella balls that she ate
while working. She was a genius. Anna’s husband, Daniel – or Dani, as we called him –
was a book editor and the founder and owner of Diogenes Verlag, a Zurich-based publishing house that
was (and still is) a major publisher of European fiction. He was brutally honest but had kind eyes
and piles of books that he used as furniture.

Anna and Dani hosted what they called “interesting dinners” at their house, inviting
random combinations of people they found fascinating. The night I arrived, all the doors were opened
so the fresh air from their tree-filled garden could fill the dining room. Dinner was served on an
oval wooden table covered with platters of pasta and cantaloupe and delicious prosciutto, along with
many different bottles of French and Italian wines.

Dani mentioned that he was distracted by a work problem. He was looking for an English speaker with
a European driving licence to take care of one of his authors in Ticino, the Swiss-Italian part of
Switzerland. “I am desperate,” he whispered. “This is for someone important; I
can’t really advertise the position.” The divorced man who had been doing the job for some
months, Dani told me, had just called to say he was not going to do it any more; he had decided to
become a monk.

Dani got up to open yet another bottle of chianti. Without thinking it through, I volunteered for
the job. “I speak English,” I said, in English. “And I am licensed to drive in Europe
and the US.” As Dani knew, I was about to go back to Spain to start my junior year of college,
so he shook his head. But I insisted, explaining that all I needed to do was go to class for a month
to meet the professors and collect the philosophy books assigned; after I had done that, I could
help until my exams in December. (Attendance was not mandatory at my university.) My grandfather had
been a theatre impresario and patron of the arts, and growing up, I had heard many stories about him
helping all sorts of artists. When I eventually got to meet them, they seemed incredibly grateful
for all my grandfather had done for them. So helping a writer in need seemed like the thing to do.

As he served the new wine to the group, Dani told me very quietly he was talking about Patricia
Highsmith. I did not react. “How many of her books have you read?” he asked.
“None,” I answered. He laughed loudly, and Anna, who had been listening from the other
side of the table, said she was sure that I had at least watched Hitchcock’s film Strangers on
a Train, which was based on one of Highsmith’s novels. I did remember having liked it on TV.

Later, after a few more bottles were emptied, Dani told me he would ask Pat if she might consider
me. But given how young I was, he said, I was not to get my hopes up.

-------------------------

Within a week, Pat agreed to interview me. I took the train from Zurich through a heavy summer
storm. On the way, I finished reading my first Highsmith novel, The Tremor of Forgery (1969). The
man who had been taking care of her came to pick me up at the train station in Locarno, a Swiss town
on the northern tip of Lake Maggiore, not far from her house. He looked old to me, not too tall,
with glasses. He greeted me as if it were he, not I, who had finally arrived home after a long trip.
We ran into a cafe, and over a quick cup of coffee, he told me about his months with Pat. He talked
about her irritability, how difficult it could be to deal with her temper, and her health issues. He
spoke about his reasons for moving into a monastery and his hope of finding peace. Our conversation
scared me a bit; he seemed to be in the midst of an existential crisis, and he disclosed far too
much to me, a 20-year-old stranger.

“Pat is an amazing writer,” he said. “So imaginative. But she does not like people.
You will feel you are bothering her, but don’t think it is something you did. She is like
that.”

I found his description of Highsmith perplexing. How can someone so isolated write so well about
human nature, I thought. I could see, touch and almost smell the characters in the novel I had just
finished. I felt as if I were still with Howard Ingham – the main character – in Tunisia,
questioning the absurdity of our moral codes, rather than having coffee with a future monk on an
unpleasant, rainy summer day.

The future monk seemed on the verge of tears as we got into an old Volkswagen Polo to drive to her
house. Tegna is only three miles from Locarno, but those 10 minutes felt long. It had stopped
raining, but it did not feel like August. He dropped me off at the door, yelled “Good
luck!” without getting out of the car, and quickly backed down the driveway. I straightened my
wet, wrinkled dark-blue dress.

The house in front of me was a one-floor brutalist structure made of large bricks. It looked like
the letter U. Highsmith had designed it in the late 1980s with the help of an architect from Zurich.
It was her dream house (as in, she had literally dreamed it), similar to one she describes in
Strangers on a Train. In the book, though, the shape is a Y. I liked how the house’s hard lines
contrasted with the beautiful valley, and that, by European standards, it was quite far away from
other houses. The concrete blocks, which had once been white, looked dusty. The garden was full of
bushes and leaves. The effect was uncanny.

Highsmith opened the door before I rang the bell, as if she had been waiting behind the curtains.
She was shorter than me, very thin, petite. Wearing a sweater and oversized jeans, her greasy grey
fringe partially hiding her face, she looked unfriendly. She shook my hand in silence, then said:
“Thank you for coming.” I closed the door and followed her into the house. Without turning
around, she offered beer or tea; I asked for water. She looked fragile, but she moved quickly. She
told me to sit on a large white sofa covered with colourful cushions and blankets, then disappeared
into what I guessed was the kitchen.

[Alfred Hitchcock’s Strangers on a Train (1951), based on Highsmith’s 1950 novel of the
same name]
It was a cosy living room. I stared at the bookshelves around me. An orange cat crossed the room,
ignoring me. On the coffee table, I spotted a European magazine opened to a feature on the 100 best
living writers. Pat was right below Gabriel García Márquez. She finally returned with my
water, moving as stealthily as the cat had.

She sat down in a chair across from me and asked: “Do you like Hemingway?”

She looked me in the eyes for the first time. I drank some of my tepid tap water. I knew the
question was important. But I did not know anything about Pat or her life history. I did not know
her tastes, or her relationship with other 20th-century North American writers. I did not even know
she had lived in New York and Paris. I had read only that one book by her, just before on the train.
I set my glass on the table, knowing I was running out of time, like in a gameshow, and I decided it
was a heads-or-tails choice. I could not guess the right answer, I reasoned, so I might as well tell
the truth. “No,” I answered, as if putting my last chip down on the roulette table.

“I HATE Hemingway!” she screamed.

She stood up and walked to the door to show me out.Is that the entire interview, I wondered,
following her. I had a thousand questions about the job, the daily tasks, the car, the salary, the
conditions. But I didn’t dare open my mouth. She thanked me again for coming and told me she
would call Dani as soon as possible to convey her decision. She shook my hand, then quickly slammed
the door behind me.

The Volkswagen reappeared as I walked down the driveway. To get in, I had to pick up a large pile of
mail on the seat that had not been there 15 minutes earlier. The future monk told me he had known
the interview would be short, but not that short. “Maybe she did not like me?” I asked.

“The next train to Zurich leaves very soon, so I have to rush you back to Locarno,” he
said, ignoring my question. He looked worried; I thought he was wondering if Pat would ever find
someone to replace him, and if he would be capable of leaving her alone without feeling guilty. I
did not say anything. I stared at the 40 or so envelopes I was holding, all different sizes and with
various coloured stamps on them. Most were simply addressed “Patricia Highsmith,
Switzerland.”

-------------------------

On the long train ride back to Zurich, I dreamed about orange cats, the Tunisian heat and the
U-shaped house swallowing the pensive assistant I’d met. I was sure I would never again see the
mystery-novel author who received mail that didn’t even include an address. And I knew it would
take a while to get over the intensity of our brief encounter.

A few days later, though, as I was about to leave for the airport to return to Madrid to start
university, Dani called me at my boyfriend’s house. “Pat wants to know when you can
start,” he said. “This is a miracle!” He sounded relieved.

I said I could be in Tegna by late October. My boyfriend was going to be doing his military service
in Switzerland, so he could visit me or we could meet somewhere on his days off. Dani told me to
call him once my travel plans were confirmed, and thanked me over and over.

“Just thank the fact that I don’t like Hemingway,” I said. Dani laughed and said that
he and Anna would come visit once I was installed.

-------------------------

As promised, I made it back to Tegna a couple of months later, after flying to Zurich then taking
four trains. The red one-car train that chugged from Locarno to Tegna seemed like a toy in a set
made just for me. The arrangements had all been made so fast that I did not have time to understand
what I was getting into. I came wearing my long coat, heeled boots and black hat, ready for a
literary adventure.

Inside Pat’s house, a woman who had been helping around the home waited, impatient to leave.
She and the cleaning lady would now come as little as possible. Pat showed me to my room. It was big
and had a queen-size bed. She pointed to the bookshelves with all her first editions “in
order”. That’s when I told her I had read only The Tremor of Forgery and had loved it. She
said that in her opinion it was by far her best novel, so from now on her books would just
disappoint me. This turned out not to be true: Edith’s Diary soon became my new favourite. But
I understand why Pat, a queer person who never felt accepted by society (and who had a hard time
accepting her own queer self), preferred The Tremor, a book about the need to question the moral
codes we are handed, to all her other work.

The shelves in my room also held autographed books by, and biographies of, her friends, like Graham
Greene (the ones from Truman Capote were out in the living room), as well as many volumes about
Marlene Dietrich, with whom she was obsessed. Pat’s personal and literary notebooks were stowed
in closets and shelves right outside my room. She told me she had written almost every day for over
50 years.

My room was freezing. It had large French doors leading out on to a courtyard, on the other side of
which was Pat’s room. Her curtains were open, so I could see the single bed and writing desk in
her messy bedroom. This voyeuristic setup also, of course, allowed her to see me and my room. She
left me to unpack. I had no idea what was expected of me other than my presence. I came back into
the living room, but she was in her room, typing. When she finally emerged from her room for dinner
that first night, I followed her into the kitchen. She boiled water in a pot and added a bouillon
cube. She asked me if I wanted supper, and I nodded, so she added another cube. That was dinner. She
served herself a large mug of dark beer from a box she kept in the pantry and announced that the
next day, she would teach me how to go to the supermarket.

[Cate Blanchett in Carol (2015), an adaptation of Highsmith’s lesbian romance The Price of Salt
(1952)]
I read Strangers on a Train later that night, lying in bed. I could see, across the courtyard, Pat
moving around in the dark of her room with a torch. I did not understand why she was using a torch
when the electricity worked just fine. It was unnerving, but I was too absorbed by the novel to
question her strangeness.

The next day, I became the driver of the Volkswagen. I was a new and terrible driver, but Pat was
very enthusiastic about my driving, probably because I went so slowly, which she said used less
petrol. We went to the supermarket and bought soup cubes, beer boxes and food for the cat, which,
Pat said, ate raw cow offal that the butcher was kind enough to reserve for her. She told me I would
go shopping by myself once a week to pick up these things. We also got cheap bologna, white sandwich
bread and six small apples. She introduced me to the butcher, who kept repeating
“Charlotte” (the name of Pat’s cat) with a funny Italian accent. Pat paid with cash
and brought used plastic bags to avoid paying for new ones. I was trying to remember everything and
did not realise I was going to starve unless I bought my own beer for calories.

I soon discovered that a neighbour stopped by every few days with minestrone soup or chicken stew,
which she made at her home, since Pat did not allow her to cook in the house. Each evening, we would
“dine” together at seven o’clock. We served ourselves in the kitchen and then, since
the dining table was covered with unopened mail and other clutter, we unearthed a couple of place
mats from beneath the junk and sat down. The room was dimly lit at all times, and Pat barely tasted
those meals – her bowl was usually empty or had only a little broth. But she always brought a
litre of beer to the table.

I would eat slowly, trying to match her lack of appetite, and ask many questions that she enjoyed
answering. She never offered me any beer and seemed surprised that I did not bring my own. She told
me the doctors had forbidden her from taking her favourite poison (whisky), but I found a bottle of
scotch hidden in the kitchen, and it kept getting emptier, even though she told me it was just for
visitors (who never came). She’d had to quit smoking and was not supposed to drink at all
because of her health. (Whatever was wrong with her seemed to be a secret, but Anna had implied it
was cancer.) She was clearly used to drinking as much as her characters do; they sometimes comment
that their liquor servings are “smallish”.

At dinner a few days later, I asked if she had a computer, and she told me she still wrote all her
work, and all her letters, on the same typewriter she had used to write Strangers on a Train at
Yaddo, the artists’ colony in Saratoga Springs, New York. Hitchcock’s decision to adapt
that novel into a 1951 film had changed Pat’s life. She had been making ends meet by writing
comic books and taking other low-paying gigs, such as an editorial assistantship. When Hitchcock
bought the rights to her novel anonymously – in order to pay less – Pat got $7,500. But
more important than the money was the fact that, once the film was made, she became known, making it
easier for her to meet people, get more writing jobs and publish books. This was why Pat kept using
that typewriter, even though she had others, all of which looked prehistoric to me.
“Superstition, I suppose,” she concluded.

Pat did not talk much. She did tell me that although Hitchcock’s adaptation had
“destroyed” her novel, she was forever grateful to him. In Strangers on a Train, she
explained, the perfect crime is successful; both antiheroes win. But at the time, Hollywood had a
morality code – the Hays Code – which meant that evil could not go unpunished, and so
Hitchcock had a screenwriter come up with a new ending. She did not blame him for this. She seemed
to be proud that Hitchcock liked her novel the way she had written it.

Early the next morning, Charlotte woke me up meowing, as she would every morning. During the day,
she slept somewhere or went hunting, but she always roused me at dawn. Pat had shown me how to slice
the cow lungs we got from the butcher who kept saying “Charlo-TTe”. And now, every
morning, Charlotte circled my legs, pushing impatiently as I prepared her breakfast. When I cut the
lungs with the kitchen scissors, the alveoli would explode, popping like bubble wrap. It was an
unsettling, disgusting sensation.

After, as I washed my hands with detergent, I would hear Pat’s radio crackle on. She listened
to the BBC for an hour every morning before getting up. Some days, I could not hear the radio until
a bit later, and I would fear that she had died. I dreaded the thought of having to find her dead.
(One morning towards the end of my stay, Pat did not turn on the radio at all, and I spent hours
listening for movement behind the closed door.)

[Highsmith at home in Switzerland, 1985.]
As Charlotte ate her breakfast, I would make myself a black tea. Dressed and ready to go in case Pat
needed anything, I would read until I heard her come out of her room. Most days, she went briefly to
the bathroom and then to the kitchen and then returned to her room, after which the typing would
start. At that point, she was writing only letters, I believe. Sometimes she came to find me so she
could share her plans, or ask me to get the mail because she was waiting for something or had
something to send.

On days when it was clear she was not going to need me, I would volunteer to go to the post office,
just so I could walk around Tegna and have a coffee at the tiny town bar. The post office always had
mail for Pat, but the postal workers were not friendly. My guess is they had heard Pat was a lesbian
with no family, so must have assumed that I, the young woman living with her, had to be some sort of
well-paid lover. And to be fair, I did not look like a nurse. I understood why Pat had stopped going
there long ago and did not allow those judgy postal workers near her house.

My walks allowed me to get fresh air, look at the mountains and take a break from the oppressive
indoors. The house was depressing because Pat did not consider herself to be among the living. She
explained that the magazine I saw during my interview had invited the 100 best authors alive to a
celebratory event in Paris. “I obviously declined,” she told me. And I understood that she
thought she was among the 100 best but did not consider herself to be really alive.

-------------------------

Dani and Anna called us on Sundays. At one point, Dani explained that Pat had to go over the galleys
of her novel Small g: A Summer Idyll, and I had to fax him her corrections. She had finished the
novel a few months back, but she made significant last-minute edits. Every day, Pat made me fax the
same page several times as she made changes. She was a perfectionist and studied each page for
hours. She called Small g, which is about Zurich’s gay scene, her last novel, so my guess is
she wanted it to be a great one. I did not get to read it until several months after she died. I was
impressed by how much she knew about the city’s gay community and by her realistic portrayal of
the Aids epidemic.

Pat did not let me use her phone to call my boyfriend. Whenever he called, she told him I was not
there. I did not dare confront her, even though I was counting on him visiting, even staying over
occasionally. One day, I worked up the courage to ask her, and she told me that he could not enter
her house or garden; if I met him at the town bar, I could not be gone for more than an hour, in
case she needed me. My boyfriend and I decided he should not come, since I couldn’t even get
away to meet him in Locarno. We just wrote letters. The same went for my friends and parents. A
letter from Spain took 10 days to reach its destination, but she was clear that I could not occupy
her phone line. When someone did call me, she would pick up the phone in her room, loudly clear her
throat and announce she needed the phone for an urgent call, which she then never made.

I did not question her rules or the assertiveness with which she refused to let me out of her world
or anyone in, insistent that nobody could interrupt her routine or distract us from her bitter wait.
I was weak and submissive, because of a lack of experience and because of the constant fear that
something might happen to her while she was on my watch. I obsessed over not bothering her, and
shortened my walks around town, tortured by my sense of responsibility, worried that Pat was unwell
and alone, or needed me to fax the same page yet another time. So I adapted to her ways, becoming
just as isolated, always home with her or near her, accompanied by only her novels, waiting for
something to happen. I was mesmerised by the perfect crimes she had created in her books, and given
how angry at life she seemed, I wondered if she had ever tried to kill someone herself.

The only regular intrusion of the outside world into our claustrophobic existence was the Sunday
phone call from Dani and Anna. Dani would talk to Pat for a bit, and then Anna would talk to me for
10 minutes. Anna could hear in my voice that I was not doing well, so she and Dani came to visit, as
promised. They gave little notice of their plans, and afterwards Pat complained for days about
having had to host them. They arrived late – “So rude,” she kept saying – and
brought a gorgeous bouquet of two dozen tea roses. Pat told me to put them in a vase, whispering
about how they had probably spent more than 500 francs on something that we would have to watch die.
Dani was used to Pat’s insults and understood that aggression was her way of relating, so he
just moved on to talking shop about Small g.

Dani got along with her, maybe because he could be just as impatient and abrasive. He had overseen
her world rights for years. She respected him. Pat was on bad terms with all her previous editors.
While they talked in the living room, Anna took me to my room, worried about the dark shadows under
my eyes and my weight loss. “We knew this would not be easy,” she told me.

“I am fine, Anna,” I answered, trying to smile.

“You are living with a difficult person who is waiting to die, and you remind her of everything
she can no longer have,” Anna consoled me.

[Gwyneth Paltrow, Jude Law and Matt Damon in The Talented Mr Ripley (1999).]
Pat could not say no to Dani, so she allowed them to take me out to the only restaurant in town,
where I ate a real dinner, including wine and zabaglione, a fluffy gift of hedonism and freedom that
became my favourite dessert. They reminded me there was life out there, people to talk to, good
food, laughter, air. I confessed that not being able to call anyone or have visits was hard, but I
had got used to it. I told them I understood that old Pat had her ways but was not trying to hurt
me.

I said the hardest rule to follow was her mandate that I keep the lights off at night because she
thought electricity too expensive. That’s why she used a flashlight and gave me one to use,
too. I had got used to fearing her flashlight reflecting across the patio, but I dreaded total
darkness because of what that could mean. I found it puzzling that the most basic expenses worried
someone who had so much money. She yelled at me if I turned on a light by accident or used too much
water, too many stock cubes, too many paper napkins, too much fuel for her car. She gave me very
little money for groceries and petrol, and I told them that she had not paid me and that I was
starting to feel as if I preferred not to be paid. Her pathological obsession with saving money
shocked me.

I also told Dani and Anna that I had been reading the first editions on Pat’s shelves in
chronological order, during the day and by torch at night. I was in awe of her characters, human
antiheroes, complicated souls. I was well into the Ripley saga by then and joked that maybe she
would achieve the perfect crime by killing me even if she could not steal my identity. Later, as we
were saying goodbye, Anna said something I didn’t expect: “It is obvious. Pat is just in
love with you.”

I did not know it then, but Pat had written many years ago, in her diary, that there are no sexually
satisfied killers. She wrote that around the time she was creating Ripley. It was obvious from the
Ripley series that frustrated desire was the catalyst for crime in Pat’s world, and Anna
telling me that Pat was upset and short with me because she might love me made me even more afraid.
Like Ripley, Pat could be charming but also dark, possessive, irrational and impatient.

When I got back home from dinner, Pat was watching TV. She was upset that I had been gone for almost
three hours and had missed half of the weekly BBC true-crime special we watched together. She told
me that the show had given her ideas for her work, so she found it inspiring. I hated true crime.

We watched the rest of the show together in silence. I could not stop thinking about what Anna had
said to me.

-------------------------

Once or twice a week, I drove Pat to Locarno’s hospital for her treatments. They took a long
time. As I waited, I read my philosophy homework because I did not want her to see me reading her
books in public; she was uncomfortable with being recognised.

I did not know what kind of transfusions she got at the hospital (the fact that she had lung cancer
did not become public until after her death), but they always made her feel better afterwards.
Certainly, her mood lifted, though never for very long. She was private and worried about what
others would say of her. Much later, I read that when she was young she had felt guilty about her
gayness and so had hidden it, dating men and even trying psychoanalysis so she could marry a man, a
fellow writer who was her good friend. All that negativity and frustration Pat radiated seemed to
come from a deep guilt about being who she was. After her diaries became public, some articles noted
that she had moments when she was able to accept being a lesbian and was unbothered by her
significant drinking problem, but the Pat I knew had reverted to her shame.

[Alain Delon in Plein Soleil (1960), an adaptation of Highsmith’s novel The Talented Mr Ripley]
I left her in early December to return home to take my exams. I had reminded her of my departure
date for weeks. She did not make other arrangements for someone to look after her, just asked me to
stay. I explained that I could not miss my finals, and that my family expected me for Christmas in
Spain, but she ignored me. She pretended she could write our lives as if we were in one of her
novels.

-------------------------

On our last night together, she avoided talking to me or even looking at me. When I put my bags by
the door the next morning, I expected a hug, as if I were the granddaughter she never had; instead,
she offered me her hand for the third and last time. Her eyes were wet. I asked her to sign a German
edition of a book about her that Dani had given me. She simply wrote her name without a dedication
or personal note. She was angry. I was abandoning her, she finally said, just like
“others” had done. She handed me an envelope with the weeks’ worth of salary she owed
me, then went to her room. I had to close the door behind me and walk to the tiny red train that
took me to Locarno. I never saw her again.

On the train, I dreamed that I never made it home. When my parents called Anna, she called Pat, who
said I had left the house to catch the morning train after she autographed my book and wished me the
best. Soon, the police were telling my parents that I hadn’t made my flight and they
couldn’t find me. I woke from the dream exhausted as my train was pulling into Zurich. I wiped
the fog off the window with my hand to look at the city. Boring normal life felt so good, and I
could not wait to be home, to get home alive.

After Christmas, I spoke with Dani, who told me that Pat’s health had deteriorated after I
left, and she had been admitted to the hospital in Locarno. I do not think she ever returned home.
She died there at the beginning of February. Part of me was guilty and ashamed to realise this, but
I was glad I had not been there for her worst days. Dani invited me to her funeral, which took place
in March on my 21st birthday, but I declined.

-------------------------

It took me decades to digest my time with Pat. I did not want to think or talk about it. Eventually,
I came to the conclusion that Pat had not been in love with me, and had not, of course, been trying
to kill me, but I do think she loved and hated the fantasy of being me: young, positive, loved,
hopeful, straight, healthy, maybe even happy.

In late 2022, I returned to Tegna to visit the house where I had lived with Pat for those few weeks.
She had told me that, after her death, it would be made into a museum dedicated to her life and
work. That did not happen. Instead, the house is surrounded by the weekend homes that popped up
around it, and today a family lives there with a lot of useless stuff everywhere. From the manicured
garden, I saw that the foyer that led to my old bedroom was now filled with toys. And a swimming
pool had been installed in the courtyard that formed the U, where Pat and I used to look across into
each other’s rooms. I felt happy that she did not live to see this. We will miss the good
things that happen after we die, but we will be spared some major disappointments. The house Pat
dreamed up did not have a pool.

_This is an edited version of a piece that appeared in The Yale Review_
